L. ANNAEUS CORNUTUS

Greek Theology
draft translation
by
George Boys-Stones
DurhamUniversity
© 2016

Text: The translation follows the text of C. Lang, Cornuti Theologiae Graecae
Compendium (Leipzig 1881): variations noted. Lang page-numbers are in square
brackets. The chapter-divisions in curved brackets are traditional (but not original to
Cornutus). The section-divisions and headings are my own. Note on Translation: I use
the pronouns “he” and “she” to refer to the persons of the deities, but “it” when the
subject of some claim is clearly intended to be the feature of the cosmos they represent.
(Where it is not clear, I default to “he” and “she”.) (The fact that all nouns in Greek are
gendered, and that they are usually aligned with the corresponding gender of deity – cf.
15.10-11! – means that this is not a distinction Cornutus generally had to make.)
Typographical conventions: words whose etymologies are given by Cornutus are put in
‘scare-quotes’; translations of his etymologies are in italics. “Double quotation marks”
are used for mere quotation or mention.

1

A. First Survey of the Physical System
A.1 Cosmos: origins and structure
[1] (1) ‘Heaven’, my child, encircles earth and sea and everything on the earth and in the sea,
and this is how acquired its name – being the upper limit of all things and the limit of nature. [2]
But some say that it is so-called from the fact that it care for or takes care of things, i.e. guards
them. (This is where the word for ‘door-keeper’ comes from; also ‘to treat with care’.) Others
find its etymology in the words for looking upwards. Considered with everything it embraces, it
is called ‘cosmos’, from the fact that everything is arranged in the best possible way. Some of
the poets said that he was the son of ‘Akmon’, hinting at the unwearied nature of its circuit – or
else they established this on the basis of the etymology because they understood that heaven is
indestructible; for we call the dead worn out. Its substance is fiery, as is clear from the sun and
the other stars. This is why the outermost part of the cosmos is called ‘aether’: because it blazes
– although some say that it is named this way because it always runs, i.e. is carried along at a
rush. And the ‘stars’ are as it were unstable, since they are never fixed in place, but always in
motion. It is reasonable to think that the ‘gods’ acquired their name from hurrying; for in the
first place, the ancients conceived their notion of god from those things they saw unceasingly
borne along, reckoning that they were responsible for changes in the air and for sustaining the
universe. [2] But perhaps the ‘gods’ are those who establish and make those things that come
into being.
(2) Just as we are governed by a soul, so the cosmos has a soul which holds it together,
and this is called ‘Zeus’ – who lives pre-eminently and in everything, and is the cause of life in
those things that live. Because of this, Zeus is said to reign over the universe – just as our soul
and nature might be said to reign over us. And we call him ‘Dia’ because through him
everything comes to be and is sustained. Among some people he is called ‘Deus’ as well,
perhaps because he bedews the earth or gives a share of live-giving moisture to the living. (And
the genitive case of it is Deos, which is related somehow to Dios.) He is said to live in heaven,
since that is where the most important part of the cosmic soul is – and indeed our souls are fire
too.
(3) Tradition relates that his wife and sister is ‘Hera’, i.e. air, which is linked and
bonded to him directly: she rising from the earth, he having come down to her. And they were
born as a result of a flow in the same direction: for when substance flowed towards fineness, it
gave rise to both fire and air. This is why mythology makes ‘Rhea’ their mother. It makes their
father ‘Kronos’ either because these things came to be in ordered measures of time, or because
the elements are distinguished by the combination and agitation of matter; or, as is most
plausible, because aether and air come about whenever nature is roused to make out of fire the
things that exist, and bring them to completion. (4) For this reason, the ancients said that
Poseidon is also the son of Kronos and Rhea: for water is a product of the aforementioned
change as well. ‘Poseidon’ is the power which produces moisture in the earth and around the
earth – whether so called from drink, and the fact that he provides the same; or whether he is the
principle responsible for nature sweating: “Physiidion”; or whether it is as if he were called
Earth-Shaker, in line with the characteristic activity ascribed to him in the tradition. (5) Hades is

2

said to be their brother. He is the most dense form of air, closest to the earth, and is produced
along with them when nature starts [5] to flow and make the things that exist according to the
principles within it. It is called ‘Hades’ either because it is in itself unseen (so that he is also
called ‘Aïdes’, with a diaeresis); or by antithesis, as if it is the one who pleases us – for it
appears that this is where our souls go at death, and death is least pleasing to us. It is called
‘Pluto’ as well, because, all things being perishable, there is nothing that does not in the end get
allocated to him and become his property.
(6) The characterisation of ‘Rhea’ is appropriate to the flow she represents. To her is
ascribed the cause of rain-storms; and because it usually happens that storms are accompanied
by thunder and lightening, it became a custom that Rhea rejoices in drums and cymbals, the
playing of horns, and torch-lit processions. And since rain-storms pour down from above, and
often seem to come from the mountains, first of all they gave her the name of Ida – a skyscraping mountain, visible from a long way off – addressing her as being ‘of the mountains’; [6]
and they made it a custom that her chariot should be pulled by lions, which are the most noble
of the animals that live in the mountains (although perhaps this is because storms have a rather
wild aspect). And she wears a turreted crown, either because the first cities were built on
mountains for reasons of fortification, or because Rhea founded the first and archetypal city, the
cosmos. The poppy-head is dedicated to her, suggesting that she was the cause of animal
generation. For this reason too, certain other symbols are placed around her breast, to show that
each thing, and the variety of the things that exist, have come about thanks to her. The Syrian
Atargatis seems to be the same as Rhea; and she is honoured by abstention from the dove and
from fish, signifying that air and water make the flow1 of substance especially manifest.
Rhea is known, distinctively, as Phrygian because her worship is especially cultivated
among the Phrygians. Here, the service of Galli is not uncommon, and perhaps represents
something like the Greek myth about the castration of Ouranos. First of all, Kronos is said to
swallow [7] the children born to him from Rhea. This is understood in a way that is completely
reasonable: whatever comes about according to the descriptor of motion mentioned earlier
disappears again in its turn according to the same thing – and time is indeed something like this;
for everything born in it is consumed by it. Next, Rhea, they say, having given birth to Zeus,
gave Kronos a swaddled stone instead of him, saying that this is what she had given birth to; he
swallowed it, and Zeus, who was raised in secret, came to reign over the cosmos. Here the
swallowing is not understood literally: the myth has been composed about the origin of the
cosmos, whose governing nature was raised and brought to power when this stone which we
call the earth had been as it were ‘swallowed’ and fixed firmly at the very centre of it. Nothing
that exists could have come about if it were not supported on this foundation; and all things are
born and raised from it. (7) And finally, it is said that Kronos castrated Ouranos, who was
continually descending for intercourse with Earth, and stopped his outrages. But Zeus expelled
him from his throne and threw him down to Tartarus. By all this, then, they hint that the plan for
the universe to come into being – which we said was [8] called ‘Kronos’ from make – sent the
great flow of what until then had been surrounding down towards it, making the exhalations
finer. Cosmic nature (which we said was called Dia) was strong, and restrained the excessive
impetus in this change, giving a longer life to the cosmos itself. And it is quite appropriate that
1

Reading ῥεῦσιν for αἵρεσιν.

3

Kronos was called Crafty in Counsel, since he produces such a great number of things that what
he plans is crafty and hard to follow.
(8) In a different account, Okeanos was said to be the progenitor of all things – for there
was more than one story about this topic – and his wife was said to be Tethys. ‘Okeanos’ is
reason as it moves swiftly and makes changes in due sequence; ‘Tethys’ is the stability of
qualities. What exists comes about from the combination or mixing of these two: there would be
nothing if either prevailed unmixed.
A.2 Cosmos: order and justice
[9] (9) Next: Zeus is called “father of gods and men”, because cosmic nature caused these things
to exist, as fathers give being to their children. They call him Cloud-Gatherer and Thundering
and give him the thunder-bolt and aegis as attributes because he is responsible for the clouds
and thunder above us, and for the storms and thunder-bolts that rush down from there – the
whole space above the earth being allocated to the god to whose lot heaven fell. And he was
called Aegis-Bearer because of ‘hurricanes’, which are so-called from the word for rushing; and
for other, similar reasons which are easy to understand, he was called Bringer of Rain, Guardian
of Fruits, God of the Thunderbolt, God of the Lightening Flash – and various other things too,
according to the different views people had of him. They also call him Saviour, and Bulwark,
and Guardian of the City, and God of our Forefathers, God of our Race, God of Hospitality,
Protector of Property, Counsellor, God of the Trophy, and Deliverer: these names are endless,
since he extends to every power and state and is the cause and overseer of everything. Likewise,
he was also said to be the father of Justice, because it was he who brought community to the
affairs of men [10] and ordered them not to wrong each other; and of the Graces, because this is
the source of gracious and beneficent action; and of the ‘Seasons’, which are named for their
guarding the changes in the [sc. earth’s] surrounding which sustain everything, including things
that grow on earth. By tradition, he has the age of a mature man, since he shows neither
deficiency nor excess, but what is appropriate to someone fully-grown. For this reason too,
mature animals are sacrificed to him. The sceptre is a symbol of his power, being something
carried by kings; or of his sure and steady bearing, like those supported by staffs. And the
missile which he holds in his right hand has a name too clear to need explanation. He is often
depicted ruling over Victory, for he is superior to everything, and nothing can defeat him. The
eagle is said to be his sacred bird because this is the swiftest of birds. He is crowned with olive
because olive is evergreen, lustrous, and useful for many things; or because of the similarity of
its grey colour to heaven. He is called by some Avenger and Blood Avenger because he
punishes those who deserve ‘vengeance’ and are ‘guilty of blood’ – the former being named
[11] from the fact that they commit crimes in the face of which one might feel hatred and grief;
the latter from the fact that they acquire inexpiable pollution from crimes of violence.
(10) The so-called ‘Erinnyes’ came about in the same way, as investigators of crimes:
‘Megaira’ and ‘Tisiphone’ and ‘Alekto’ – as if god holds a grudge against such men, and
punishes the murders done by them, and does this unremittingly and unceasingly. These
goddesses truly are holy and Kindly: for it is nature’s benevolence towards men has also
provided for the punishment of wickedness. They have terrifying faces. They pursue the
impious with fire and goads, and they are called “snake-haired”, because this is the impression

4

made on the minds of the wicked by the penalties they pay for their crimes. They are said to live
in Hades because the sufferings that come to these men lie in hiding, and punishment comes to
those who deserve it out of the blue. (11) Consistent with this is the line: “The eye of Zeus sees
all, and he hears all.” For how can anything that happens in the cosmos [12] elude the power
that pervades everything?
And they call Zeus Gentle, since he is easily appeased by those who repent of their
injustice – he does not want to be irreconcilable towards them. For this reason there are altars
dedicated to Zeus God of Suppliants. (12) And the Poet said that the Prayers are daughters of
Zeus. They are lame because those who supplicate fall down; they are wrinkled because of the
suppliants’ display of weakness; they squint because they overlook some prayers, intent on
whatever future necessity.
(13) And Zeus is ‘Lot’, because the distribution of the things that are assigned to each
person is not seen – which is why other potions are called “lots”. ‘Destiny’ is the unperceived
and unknown cause of things that come about – in which case it indicates the obscurity of things
considered piecemeal. Or, according to earlier people, it is what always exists. What is ‘fated’ is
that by which all the things that come about have been seized and put together in an order and
series that has no limit. (The syllable hei- contains the idea of “putting together”, as in heirmos
[“series”].) [13] ‘Necessity’ is what it is impossible to break and overcome; or it is the point to
which everything that comes about develops. In another approach, the tradition gives us three
Lots, corresponding to the three aspects of time: one of them is named ‘Klotho’ from the fact
that events are like the spinning of fleeces: one thing comes on top of another (and this is also
why they represent the spinner as the oldest); another is called ‘Lachesis’ from the fact that what
is assigned to each person is like the apportionment of what is allotted; the third is called
‘Atropos’ because the things arranged by her are unchangeable. It might appropriately seem that
the three names all have the same force, which is ‘Adresteia’, named either because of being
ineluctable and inescapable; or from the fact that the things for which she is responsible are
always active, as if it were “Aiei-drasteia”; or else the privative particle is indicative of
magnitude in this case, as in the phrase “unchipped wood”: for it does a great deal. It is called
‘Nemesis’ from distribution – for it divides out what happens to each person; ‘Fortune’ from the
fact that it builds our surroundings and is the craftsman of those things which befall men; and
‘Opis’ because it escapes notice and, as it were, follows behind and [14] keep an eye on our
actions, so as to punish those that are worthy of punishment.
A.3 Education and ethics
(14) Zeus is said to have been father of the Muses by Mnemosyne [“Memory”] since he was the
author of those curricular subjects which are learnt through hard work and retention as the
things most necessary for a good life. They are called ‘Muses’ from seeking, i.e. searching – in
the sense of the line: ‘O wretch! Don’t seek the soft, don’t hold the hard!’ They are nine
because, as someone says, they render those who belong to them square [or: virtuous] and odd
[or: learned] – that being what the number 9 is like: it is constituted by that number which
seems to be the first after 1 to partake of some perfection generating2 it from itself. [15] Βut
2

Reading γεννᾶσθαι for γενέσθαι.

5

some say that there are only two, some three, some four, others seven. Three because of the
perfection of the triad, which has been mentioned; or because there are three kinds of
investigation which make up a philosophical account of the world. Two, because it falls to us
both to contemplate and to do what must be done, and these two topics constitute education.
Four and seven perhaps because the musical instruments of antiquity had that many strings.
They were presented as women because the words for the virtues and for education happen to be
feminine, and symbolise the fact that learning comes from staying at home and from stability.
They associate and dance with each other to show that the virtues are inseparable from each
other and cannot be unyoked. They spend time in particular in singing hymns and serving the
gods, since it is a fundamental part of education to raise one’s gaze to the divine, and those who
take it as their model for life ought to talk about it. In any case, ‘Kleio’ is one of the Muses [16]
because the educated obtain renown, and they themselves, along with others, celebrate them.
‘Euterpe’ is so called from the fact that associating with them is pleasant and attractive. And
‘Thaleia’, because their life always flourishes – or because they also have the virtue of
conviviality, and conduct themselves with wit and decorum at feasts. ‘Melpomene’ derives from
the sweet song which results when a tune is given voice – for the good are sung about by
everyone, and they themselves sing of the gods and of earlier men. ‘Terpsichore’ is so called
because they enjoy themselves and rejoice for most of their lives; or because the very sight of
them gives pleasure to those who approach them. (In this case, the final part of the name [i.e. chore] is superfluous; but perhaps it is there because the ancients instituted dances for the gods,
the wisest among them composing songs for them.) ‘Erato’ either takes her name from love,
because she cares about every kind of philosophy; or else she oversees the ability to ask
questions and give answers, since the wise engage in dialogue. ‘Polymnia’ is virtue, which is
greatly hymned; or rather, [17] perhaps, she hymns many, and hears everything that is hymned
about our ancestors and after research from poems and other writings. ‘Ourania’ is knowledge
about the heavenly bodies and the nature of the universe – for the ancients called the whole
cosmos heaven. ‘Kalliope’ is rhetoric, which is beautiful of voice and beautiful of word; by this,
men govern cities and address the people, leading them by persuasion, not force, to whatever
they choose. This, in particular, is why Hesiod says that she “serves kings and bards”. Tradition
assigns various instruments to them, each showing that the life of the good is well structured,
harmonious with itself and consistent. Apollo dances with them because of his affiliation with
the arts. Tradition has it that he plays the kithara, for a reason you will learn in a little while.
They say that they dance in the mountains because those who love learning need to be alone and
are always going into the wilderness, “without which nothing holy is discovered” as the comic
poet has it. Because of this Zeus is said to have fathered them during nine nights of intercourse
with Mnemosyne: [18] night-time research is necessary for the business of education. This,
anyway, is why the poets called night “kindly”; and Epicharmos, then, says: “if there is wisdom
you seek, consider it at night” and “all serious answers are best found at night”. Some say that
they were born from Heaven and Earth, since one must think that the account of them is the
most ancient. They are crowned with palm because, some think, of its homonym: writing is
thought to have been an invention of the Phoenicians. But it is more reasonable to hold that it is
because the palm is a delicate plant, vigorous, perennial, difficult to climb, but sweet of fruit.
(15) Since, as has been said, we are capable of beneficial activity too, the greater part of
the tradition has it that that the Graces are the daughters of Zeus. [19] Some were born to him

6

by ‘Eurydome’, because a love of giving gifts is especially characteristic of wide and expansive
homes; some from ‘Eurynome’, which establishes that those who are apportioned more as their
lot are, or ought to be, more generous; and some from ‘Eurymedouse’, for just the reason
suggested by its etymology: for men are masters of their own possessions. Others say that Hera
was their mother so that they might be the most noble of the gods by birth, as they are by their
deeds. They are presented naked to make another point, which is that even those who have no
possessions are able to provide help with some things, to do many useful favours; and that one
does not have to be really wealthy in order to be a benefactor – as it is said: “in the gifts of a
friend, it’s the thought that counts.” And some think that their nakedness indicates that one must
be at ease and unencumbered in order to do favours. They are said by some to be two in
number, but by others to be three. Two, counting those who first do the favour, and those who
repay it; but three, because it is good when someone who has been repaid does another favour,
so that there is no end to it. (Their dance illustrates something of the sort as well.) Others have
said that [20] there is one Grace to represent the man who does some useful service, another for
the recipient of the service who looks out for the appropriate moment to repay it, and a third for
the person who does his own service in return at the appropriate moment. Since one should do
good deeds cheerfully, and since favours make their beneficiaries cheerful, first, the ‘Graces’
were named in common from joy (and they are said to be beautiful and to favour people with
charm and persuasiveness); but then, as individuals, they were called Aglaia, Thaleia and
Euphrosyne – some saying, because of this, that Euanthe is their mother, others Aigle. Homer
says that one of the Graces lives with Hephaistos, because the technical arts give pleasure.
(16) The tradition gives Hermes as their leader, showing that one’s favours must be
reasonable – not given at random, but to those who are worthy of them, since someone who
meets with a lack of gratitude becomes more reluctant to do good in the future. And ‘Hermes’
happens to be reason, the pre-eminent possession of the gods, which they sent to us from
heaven, making man alone of the terrestrial animals rational. He is named from contriving to
speak i.e. to talk; or from being our bulwark and stronghold, so to speak. [21] In addition, he is
called, first of all, ‘Diaktoros’, either from being piercing and distinct, or from conducting our
thoughts into the souls of those nearby – which is why they dedicate tongues to him. Secondly,
he is called ‘Eriounios’ from being a great help and from the fact that those who use it surpass
themselves in strength; and ‘stout’ as being the saviour of homes – or, as some say, strong.
Calling him ‘guileless’ signifies something similar: for reason is not for doing evil and harming,
but rather for sustaining – which is why they have Health live with him. And he is
‘Argeiphontes’, as if the word were argephantes, because it illuminates everything brightly and
clarifies it (for the ancients used the word argos for ‘bright’); or else because of the speed of the
voice, since argos means ‘swift’ as well. And he is Hermes ‘of the Golden Wand’, because it is
highly honourable even to be struck by it, since timely admonitions are worth a great deal, as is
the repentance of those who take heed of them. The tradition makes him the herald of the gods,
and he was said to announce their doings to men. He is a herald, because a herald uses a loud
voice [22] to present rational meaning to an audience; and he is a messenger, because we know
the will of the gods from the concepts rationally instilled in us. That he wears winged sandals
and is carried through the air is consistent with the idea of ‘winged words’, as they have been
called. (Iris is also for this reason called ‘wind-footed’ and ‘whirlwind-footed’ messenger – also
on the basis of her name.) And mythology represents Hermes as the Conductor of Souls,

7

associating with him its proper task of guiding souls. Anyway, this is why they put in his hand a
wand “with which he charms the eyes of those men he wishes” (obviously the eyes of the mind)
“but again rouses others, even the sleeping”. For those who are slack it is able to urge on, and
those who have been stirred up it brings to order. This is why it was thought that he sends
dreams as well, and tells the future this way, twisting impressions as he wishes: “and dreams too
are messengers of the gods.” And the snakes which twine around and complete the
aforementioned wand, the wand which looks like a messenger’s wand, are a symbol of the fact
that the savage too are bewitched and charmed by it: [23] it resolves their differences and binds
them together with a knot which is hard to undo. For this reason the herald’s wand seems to be a
‘peace-maker’. (In any case, those who pursue peace also carry branches in their hands, as a
reminder that the land wishes to be cultivated, and to spare young and fruitful plants.) They said
that Hermes was born to Zeus from ‘Maia’, again suggesting through this that reason is the
offspring of contemplation and inquiry: those who help women deliver are thus called midwives
because, as in the case of inquiry, they bring something to light – the foetus. Sculptures of
Hermes lack hands and feet, and are square in shape. Square, because there is something so
steadfast and secure about it that even its modifications serve as foundations. He lacks hands
and feet because it does not need hands or feet to complete the tasks before it. The ancients
made the genitals of the older, bearded Herms erect, but those of the younger, smooth ones hang
down: this shows that reason is fertile and ready in those advanced in age, and might actually
attain the goals it sets; but in the immature it is infertile and imperfect. He is set up in roads and
is called ‘Wayside’ and [24] ‘Guiding’, as it is necessary to use it as guide in every action, and
because it leads us in our planning down the path we need; and perhaps also because it needs
solitude to be refreshed and cultivated. Because reason is shared, and the same in all men and in
the gods, it is customary for someone who finds something as he goes along a road will to say
‘Hermes in common!’ (Hermes of the Wayside being in fact witness to the find). This shows
that people reckon the thing found to be common property – and so found objects are called
hermaia. And people heap stones up in front of Herms, each passer-by adding a stone: whether
because this is a useful public service done by each individual (it clears the road); or because it
invokes Hermes as a witness; or because it is a mark of honour to him (if one has nothing else to
bring to him); or because it makes the statue more conspicuous to passers-by; or because [25] it
acts as a symbol that uttered speech is made up of small elements. He is also, reasonably, the
first to be called god ‘of the Agora’: for he is overseer of public speakers. And from the ‘agora’,
he also extends to those who trade and sell, as everything should be done in line with reason.
From here he came to be thought of as the superintendent of the markets and was named god
“of Business” and ‘of Profit’, since it alone is the cause of true profit for men. He is the inventor
of the lyre, as of the harmony and consistency by which those alive are happy, when it falls to
them to have a well-adjusted disposition. Some people wished to establish his power through
incongruous images as well, and made it part of the tradition that he was a thief; and there are
those who build altars to Hermes the ‘Deceitful’, because it stealthily erases the beliefs a man
previously held; and there are times when, by persuasion, he steals away the truth – in cases
where it is said that someone is using ‘thieving words’. And in fact the ability to use sophisms
belongs to people who know how to use reason. He is called god ‘of Law’ because the purpose
of reason is rectification: it is prescriptive of those things that must, for the good of the
community, be done, and proscriptive of things not to be done. (It is thanks to the homonymy

8

that he has been appropriated for the care of pastures as well.) [26] He is also honoured in the
wrestling-grounds alongside Heracles, because one wants to enjoy strength along with
reasoning. To someone trusting only in the power of the body, but neglecting reason (which also
gave us the arts), one might very properly say “Fool: your own strength destroys you!”
B. Wisdom and its Transmission
B.1 Theological traditions
(17) That many and various myths about the gods arose among the ancient Greeks, as others
among the Magi, others among the Phrygians, and again among the Egyptians and Celts and
Libyans, and other races, one might take as witness the way Homer’s Zeus speaks when he
confronts Hera: “Or do you not remember when I hung you on high, and fixed anvils to your
feet?” For it seems that the poet hands down this fragment of an ancient myth, according to
which Zeus is said to have hung Hera from the aether with golden chains (because the stars have
a kind of golden appearance) and fixed from her feet two anvils (clearly the earth and the sea,
[27] by which the air was stretched down, unable to be torn away from either). Another myth,
the one about Thetis, mentions that Zeus was saved by her: “When the other Olympians wished
to bind him – Hera and Poseidon and Pallas Athene.” It appears that each of these gods
individually was always plotting against Zeus, intending to prevent the cosmic order that we
have – something that would happen if the moist prevailed and everything became water, or if
fire prevailed and everything were turned to fire, or if air prevailed. But ‘Thetis’, disposing
everything in due order, set ‘Briareos’ with his hundred hands against the gods that were
mentioned – perhaps because the exhalations of the earth are distributed everywhere, as it is
through many hands that division into all the various forms occur. Or consider whether he is
named ‘Briareos’ from raising up nourishment (so to speak) for the parts of the cosmos.
‘Aegean’ is he who always flourishes and rejoices – but one must not confuse the myths, nor
transfer the names from on to another, nor should you set down unthinkingly something which
has been made up and added to the genealogies handed down according to them [28] by people
who don’t understand what they hint at, but use them as they use fictions.
B.2 Hesiod
Again, then, the myths say that Chaos was the first to be, as Hesiod relates; and after it Earth
and Tartarus and Eros; and from Chaos Erebos and Night were born; and from Night, Aether
and Day. ‘Chaos’ is the moisture that came about before cosmic order, so named from the word
for stream; or fire, which is as it were a burner, and itself streams, because of the fineness of its
parts. Everything, my child, was once fire, and will be again when the cycle comes round. On
being quenched to become air, an overwhelming change occurs to turn it into water, which it
controls, compressing part of substance to make it settle, and rarefying part to make it finer.
They say, reasonably enough, that Earth came to be after Chaos and misty Tartarus, which the
aforementioned poet named the recess of Earth because it embraces and hides it. Eros, the
impulse to generation, was said to come into being with them: for one must suppose that, [29]
when one thing arises from another, this most beautiful and gorgeous power is present at the
birth. And from Chaos was born ‘Erebos’, which is reason making a thing to be covered and

9

embraced by something else. This is why, when Earth met with it, she gave birth to Ouranos (a
thing which is similar in appearance to it), “so that he might hide her all around, so that she
might be the secure seat for the blessed gods” – the secure home for the long-lived stars which
rush along upon it. And Earth bore Ouranos from its exhalations – although the whole of the
finer substance around it is now more commonly called Ouranos. Night is also the daughter of
Chaos. For the first air which came up from the primeval moisture was dark and misty; then it
was refined and changed to aether and light, which, reasonably enough, were said to be born
from night. And Earth is said to have given Birth in turn to the mountains and the sea “without
dear affection”. And the sea, being what the transformation had made it, remained in the hollow
parts of the earth; and the mountains acquired peaks as it subsided irregularly.
[30] After all this comes the birth of the so-called Titans. These would be the
differences among the things that exist. They are, as Empedocles enumerates them in his
Physics: “Physo, Phthimene, Eunaie and Egersis, Kino, Astremphe, and many-crowned
Megisto,” and Phoryne and Siope and Omphaie – and many others, all hinting at the variety (as
I said) in the things that exist. In the same way, the process by which creatures with voices came
to be, and sound in general was made, was called ‘Iapetos’ by the ancients: it is a sort of archer,
with the voice as an arrow. And ‘Koios’ is that by which the things that exist have qualities
[poia] (the Ionians often use the sound k instead of p); or it is the cause of perceiving, that is of
contemplating or thinking. ‘Krios’ is that because of which some things rule and hold sway,
while others are commanded and ruled; perhaps also because the ram in the flock is so named.
And by ‘Hyperion’, some things rise above others; and by Okeanos, things are accomplished at
speed. (It is also called ‘soft-flowing’ because its flow appears calm and leisurely, like the [31]
movement of the sun; and ‘deep-eddying’, because it has deep eddies.). And by ‘Tethys’, things
stay in the same state for some time. And ‘Theia’ is the cause of vision; ‘Rhea’ of flux; ‘Phoebe’
of something’s being pure and bright. (One has to understand that in all these are the causes for
the opposite states as well.) Mnemosyne is the cause of recalling things that have happened;
‘Themis’ of making an agreement about something between us and keeping to it. Kronos is the
aforementioned reason behind all things brought to completion, and is the cleverest of the
children. And he said that he was the youngest of them, because during their birth, he himself
remained as it were in the process of being born.
There could be a more complete exegesis of the genealogy of Hesiod – who got some
things, I think, from those more ancient than him, but added other things for himself rather in
the manner of a story-teller (and by this means, most of the ancient theology has been
corrupted). Now, though, we should look at what is claimed by the majority.
B.3 Science and philosophy
(18) It is a tradition passed down that Prometheus fashioned the race of men out of earth. [32] It
should be understood that ‘Prometheus’ is so called as the forethought exhibited by the soul of
the universe. (More recent thinkers have called this ‘providence’.) For it was by forethought that
everything else came into being, and men were born from the earth – the original state of the
cosmos being suitably disposed for this. And it is said that Prometheus used to be with Zeus,
since all government and authority over the masses – especially when it is that of Zeus –needs
forethought. They also say that he stole fire for men, since it was through our own

10

understanding and providence that we worked out how to use fire. The myth says that
Prometheus carried the fire out of heaven either because there is a superabundance of fire there,
or because thunder-bolts crash down from there, setting fire to things that they strike down here.
(Perhaps something of the sort is also hinted by the fennel stalk.) Prometheus was bound for
this, and punished by having his liver eaten by an eagle: for our skill-set, which includes the
accomplishment I have been talking about, among others, experiences some difficulty despite
itself when it is bound up with the painful cares of life, having as it were its bowels gnawed at
by petty concerns. ‘Epimetheus’ is said to be the somewhat simple-minded younger brother of
Prometheus, because foresight is worth more than education [33] in things that have happened
and hindsight. For in truth “the fool too knows what has been done”. (This is why they say that
Epimetheus lived with the first woman: for the female is somewhat less thoughtful by nature,
and inclined to hindsight rather than foresight.)
Prometheus is said by some to have invented the technical arts just because
understanding and forethought were needed for their discovery. (19) Most people, however,
ascribe them to Athena and Hephaestus: Athena, because she seems to represent intelligence
and cleverness, and Hephaestus because most of the technical arts use fire to produce their
works. Aether, and bright, pure fire is Zeus: ‘Hephaestus’ is the fire, mixed with air, which we
use – named from having been kindled. This is why some say that he was born from Zeus and
Hera, but others from Hera alone: for these flames are somewhat denser, as if its they exist only
due to from the air being burnt up. Traditionally, he is lame, perhaps because he makes slow
progress through matter like those who limp; but perhaps it is from the fact that he cannot
proceed without something wooden – as if he needs a staff. Others still explain his being lame
by [34] the inequality and unevenness of its movement – upwards, and downwards through
what it consumes,3 the latter being slower. He is said to have been thrown to earth from heaven
by Zeus, perhaps because the first people to use fire found it where it had been started by a
thunder-bolt – given that they could never have hit on the idea of fire sticks. They say that his
wife is ‘Aphrodite’ for much the same reason as she is one of the Graces. For, just as we say
that the works of technical art are pleasing, so we say that a certain pleasure is diffused through
them – unless this story was fabricated to show that the impulse towards sex is very fiery. There
is a story that Hephaestus bound Ares while he was committing adultery with his wife (indeed,
the myth comes through the Poet, and is extremely ancient): for iron and bronze are tamed by
the power of fire. The fiction of the adultery shows that what is pugnacious and brutal does not
at all go with what is cheerful and gentle, and it is not the law of nature that brings about their
embrace. However, the former somehow manages it, and the offspring it produces from their
intercourse is fine and noble – the harmony derived from both. It is said that Hephaestus stood
midwife to Zeus, when he was giving birth to [35] Athena, and that he cut open his head and
made her leap out. For the fire which craftsmen use helps to demonstrate the natural ingenuity
of men, as if leading it out into the light when it had been hidden before – and we say that those
looking to discover something ‘conceive’ it and ‘bring it to birth’.
(20) Athena is the intelligence of Zeus, being the same thing as his providence, which is
why temples are founded to ‘Athena Pronoia’. She is said to have been born from the head of
Zeus perhaps because the ancients got the idea that the ruling part of our souls is there – as
3

Reading τροφὴν for στροφὴν.

11

others after them have thought; but perhaps because the head is the highest part of the human
body, as the aether, which is its ruling part and the substance of its wisdom, is the highest part
of the cosmos. As Euripides says: “The peak of the gods is the bright aether surrounding earth.”
Athene is motherless because the genesis of virtue is different – not the sort due to the union of
two things. Zeus, then, gave birth to her after swallowing ‘Metis’ since, as a counsellor and an
intelligent being his thought has its roots nowhere else than in his own private deliberation. [36]
It is hard to give an etymology for the name of ‘Athena’ because of its antiquity. Some say that
it comes from her contemplating everything – as if they said she was ‘Athrene’; others that it is
because, although ‘Athena’ is female, nevertheless she participates least in femininity and
weakness; others again from the fact that virtue is not the kind of thing to be slain and
overcome. And perhaps, if it is ‘Athenaia’, which is what the ancients called Athena, it means
aether-dwelling. Her virginity is a symbol of her being pure and unstained: that is what virtue is
like. Athena is depicted armed, and the story is that she was born like that, which points out that
wisdom is sufficiently kitted out for the greatest and most difficult deeds – for acts of war strike
us as the greatest. For this reason, her attributes also include great masculinity and a steely gaze.
The grey colour [sc. of her eyes] points to the same kind of thing: for the strongest wild animals,
such as leopards and lions, are grey-eyed, their flashing gaze hard to return. But some say that
Athena was made like this because the aether is grey. It is very appropriate that Athena shares
the aegis of Zeus, since she is that very thing [37] by which Zeus seems to surpass and excel
everything. There is a Gorgon’s head in the middle of the goddess’s breast, its tongue sticking
out – as if to show that reason is the most conspicuous thing in the design of the universe.
Snakes, like the owl, are associated with her because their eyes, which are grey, have some
similarity with hers: for the snake has a terrifying way of looking. Also, it is rather vigilant and
sleepless, and seems not to be easy prey, and “a counsellor should not sleep all the night”. She is
called ‘Atryone’ as if not worn out by any labour; or else because the aether is unwearied. And
‘Tritogeneia’, because she it is who has generated quaking and trembling for the evil – for she
declared war against vice. Others say that the name hints at the three kinds of subject matter in
philosophical enquiry; but that way of making sense of it is too contrived to represent the
ancient outlook. She is called ‘Laossoös’ because she rouses the nations in battles (as she is
called ‘Dispenser of Booty’ from booty); or, better, because she is the salvation of the nations
who use her – for intelligence should be made the guard of city and home and the whole of life.
For this reason she is also called Defender of the City and, like [38] Zeus, Guardian of the City:
both are overseers of cities. She is called ‘Pallas’ because of her youth in mythology, and for the
same reason that ‘lads’ and ‘lasses’ are so named: for youth is skittish and unstable. Temples
are built for her especially in a city’s acropolis, with the intention of showing that she is a tough
opponent and hard to besiege; or that she looks down from above on those who flee to her; or to
suggest the elevation of that by virtue of which Athena is a part of nature. The poets call her
‘Alalkomeneida’, and ‘Ageleis’: they derive the former from warding off – for she is capable of
protection and help, which is why she is called Victory as well –, and the latter from the fact
that she leads nations; or else from her being untameable, like common cattle, which especially
are sacrificed to her. She is said to be the inventor of the aulos, as of the other subtleties of the
technical arts, which is why she is patron of wool-spinning. She threw the aulos away, since the
tunes played on it emasculate the soul, and seem to be the least manly and warlike. The olive is
her gift because it is evergreen, and because it is somewhat grey. [39] And olive oil is not easily

12

adulterated with another liquid, but always remains unmixed so that it seems to have something
in common with the virgin. She was called ‘martial’ because she is concerned with strategy and
the organisation of wars and the fight on behalf of justice. For she is cunning in all things, and
the summation of all virtues. They call her Equestrian, too, and Horse-Tamer and SpearThrower and many other things. And they set up trophies made out of olive-wood; and,
especially, Victory is made to share her throne – Victory who makes people yield to a single
person (whoever prevails), and who is traditionally winged, because battle-lines turn quickly
and are easy changed. According to the tradition, Athena was the champion in the battle with
the giants, and she was named Giant-slayer for this sort of reason. For it is reasonable to think
that the first men, who were born from the earth, were violent and irascible with each other
because they could not yet arrive at decisions or fan the spark of community that was in them.
But the gods, as if spurring them on and reminding them of their concepts, prevailed. The
capacity allowed by reason, in particular, fought them down and put them in order so that [40] it
appears that they were changed and destroyed and no longer seemed to be like that.4 For
different men came out of this change, and those born from them lived together in cities under
the protection of Athena Guardian of the City.
(21) Other gods concerned with military matters do not similarly aim at what is stable
and reasonable, but are somewhat more disruptive: Ares and Enyo. Zeus introduced these into
things by stirring animals up against each other; and there are occasions when he decrees a
settlement by arms which, even among men, is not without utility: it makes them welcome
nobility and bravery in themselves, as well as behaviour towards one another which is
appropriate to peacetime. (For this reason, then, tradition makes Ares the son of Zeus as well by
exactly the same reasoning as that by which Athene is Daughter of a Mighty Sire.)
Accounts of Enyo differ: for some she is the mother of Ares, some his daughter, some
his nurse. But it makes no difference: ‘Enyo’ is the one who implants in soldiers their spirit and
strength; or else her name is a euphemism, because she is the least kind and seemly.
‘Ares’ got his name from [41] seizing and destroying; or from bane, i.e. injury; or again
by antithesis (as if to mollify him while addressing him) – since he smashes and ruins things
which are joined together: the name arises, then, from join, which is to fit together. (‘Harmony’
is perhaps one of these things – and mythology says that it was born from him.) He is
appropriately called Murderous and the Bane of Men; also God of the War-Cry and LoudShouting, since the loudest cry is made by those fighting in battle – and this is why some people
sacrifice asses to Ares, their braying being so disruptive and loud. (Most, however, sacrifice
dogs because they are daring and ready to attack.) Ares is said to be honoured especially by the
Thracians and Scythians and races like these, among whom the practice of warfare is highly
esteemed, as is indifference for justice. The vulture is said to be the bird sacred to him because
of their abundance wherever there are a lot of battle-slain corpses.

4

Reading τοιούτους for τοσούτους.

13

C. Second Survey of the Physical System
C.1 Water (and the principles of fertility)
(22) After this, my child, we should speak of Poseidon. It has already been said that he is the
same as the ordered power associated with the moist, and now we need to justify this. First,
then, they named him ‘Nourishing’ since, of things that come from the earth, it is clear that the
moisture in it is a contributing cause of their growth. [42] And then he is called Earth-Shaker
and Land-Shaker and Earth-Quaker and Shaker of the Earth since earthquakes are caused
precisely by the sea, and other waters, falling into the cavities of the earth: the air trapped inside
seeks a way out, and make it surge and break up – sometimes producing a bellowing noise as it
breaks. Some people understandably call him the ‘Bellower’ because the sea produces a noise
like this; and this is why he is also called Roaring and Loud-Groaning and Loud-Roaring; and
this is why bulls are thought to be associated with him, and bulls are sacrificed to him – of pure
black, because of the colour of the sea (and in any case they say water is black). (It also makes
sense that he is called dark-haired and is, by custom, made to wear dark clothes.) And because
of this rivers are depicted with horns and the face of a bull: their current has something violent
about it, so to speak, and bellows. So Skamander, according to the Poet “bellowed like a bull”.
A different approach leads some people to call Poseidon Earth-Holder and Upholder of the
Foundations. In many places they sacrifice to him as Poseidon the ‘Steadfast’, since terrestrial
buildings are [43] securely founded because they rest on him, and need him. He carries a trident,
whether because this is something used to hunt fish, or because it is a tool suited for moving the
earth, so that it is also said that “he, the earth-shaker, having in his hands a trident, led: and he
poured out all the foundations”. (‘Trident’ contains some hidden etymology, along with and
‘Triton’ and ‘Amphitrite’ – whether the letter ‘t’ is irrelevant, and they are all named like this
from the flow, or something else. Triton has a double form, part man, part leviathan, since the
aforementioned moisture has the power both to help and to harm.) Poseidon is called widechested because of the breadth of the sea (as it is also said: “on the wide back of the sea”). This
leads to his being called ‘wide-ruling’ and ‘wide-powered’. He is ‘god of the horse’ perhaps
because passage through the sea is swift, [44] and it is as if we are on horses when we use ships.
This led to the later tradition that he is the guardian of horses. He is called by some Leader of
the Nymphs and Lord of the Springs for reasons already given: ‘nymphs’ are the sources of
fresh waters, thus named because they always appear to be young, or from the fact that they
shine as new. (Brides are called ‘nymphs’ because they are now appearing for the first time,
after being hidden away.) The same line of reasoning is given for the fact that ‘Pegasus’ is the
son of Poseidon: he is named from springs. Because of the observable force of the sea,
mythology holds that all those who are violent, and who plot enormities, like the Cyclops, the
Laistrygonians and the Aloeidai, are offspring of Poseidon.
(23) ‘Nereus’ is a name given to the sea from one’s swimming through it. They also call
Nereus ‘Old Man of the Sea’ because foam crowns the waves like grey hair. ‘Leukothea’, who
is said to be the daughter of Nereus, represents something of the sort as well: clearly the ‘white’
of the foam.
(24) And it is plausible that Aphrodite is traditionally born in the sea just because
movement and moisture is necessary for the generation of everything – [45] and both are, in

14

abundance, associated with the sea. Those who make Aphrodite the daughter of ‘Dione’ are
getting at the same thing: for the moist is wet. ‘Aphrodite’ is the power which brings male and
female together. The name derives perhaps from the fact that the seed of animals is foamy or, as
Euripides suggests, because those who are conquered by her are fools. She is supposed to be
extremely beautiful because the pleasure of intercourse is especially pleasing to men and
surpasses all others. And she is called ‘laughter-loving’ because laughter and gaiety are
appropriate to this kind of encounter. The Graces share her throne and altar, as do Persuasion
and Hermes, because one seduces lovers through persuasion, speech and favours; or because of
the attraction of intercourse. She is called ‘Kytheria’ because of the pregnancies that result from
sex; or else because sexual desires are, for the most part, hidden. It is because of this that the
island of ‘Kythera’ appears to be sacred to Aphrodite, and perhaps ‘Cyprus’ too: the name
sounds a bit like hiding. But her proper home is Paphos, and she is called the ‘Paphian’, perhaps
by ellipsis from beguile which is to deceive. For according to Hesiod, she “smiles and
deceives”; and Homer talks about “allurement [46] which steals even the mind of the
thoughtful”. The ‘kestos’ is a strap, as it were something kitted out or elaborately pierced. It has
the power of tying and binding together. She is called Heavenly and Vulgar, and Goddess of the
Sea, because her power is to be seen in the heaven and on earth and in the sea. They say that the
vows of love are without authority and may be violated with impunity; and as long as she is
readily invoked, the suitor can procure for himself any woman he can use oaths to persuade.
Among the birds, Aphrodite rejoices especially in the dove, because it is a pure creature and,
because of its “kisses”, friendly. On the other hand, the pig seems to be alien to her because of
its impurity. Among plants, the myrtle has been taken to be Aphrodite’s because of its sweet
smell; and the ‘lime tree’ because of its name, which turns out to be rather similar to love, and
since it tends to get heavy use for the wreaths of her crowns. And they keep ‘boxwood’ to offer
the goddess in a kind of religious devotion [47] to her buttocks.
(25) It is no paradox, given how Aphrodite is, that Eros should share her honour and be
her companion – also her son, according to the majority tradition. He is a child because lovers
are immature in their thinking and are easily deceived; he is winged, because he makes people
bird-brained; or because he tends to fly suddenly into one’s thoughts, like a bird; he is an archer,
because those captured by him experience something like a blow just from looking – not even
approaching or touching someone beautiful, but seeing them from afar. He is given a torch,
since he seems to set souls on fire. It is plausible that he is called ‘Eros’ from the search
involved for those who are the objects of love: for inquiry is linked with searching, as in the
line: “Iphitos inquiring after horses . . .” (It is from this, I think, that ‘quest’ is also named.)
Traditionally, there is more than one Eros, because there is a variety of lovers – and because
Aphrodite is furnished with many of them as her attendants. Eros is called ‘Desire’, named
either from being eager for and carried away towards the enjoyment to be had of those in their
prime; or to represent the distraction experienced by the mind, which becomes silly in the face
of it. [48] He is called ‘Yearning’ from a representation of kisses (which is how we get the word
‘pappa’ too); or else from the fact that a lover finds out many thing about their beloved – and
from their very questions: whence they come and where they were.
Some think that Eros is also the whole cosmos: beautiful, desirable, young, and at the
same time the oldest thing of all; rich in fire, and the cause of swift motion, such as that
produced by a bow, the use of wings. (26) In another sense they say that it is ‘Atlas’, tirelessly

15

producing everything that comes to be according to the principles encompassed in it, and thus
holding up even the heavens. Its great pillars are the powers of the elements, which lead to some
things being borne upwards, and some downwards; heaven and earth are governed by them.
Atlas is called Sagacious because he is concerned for the universe and provident in seeing to the
welfare of all its parts. From him were born the ‘Pleiades’, it being established that it generated
all the stars, of which there are a superabundance. He is identical with ‘Astraios’ and
‘Thaumas’ [49] because it does not stand still (it is never everywhere at rest – although its
progress is the best possible, and calm), and it produces great wonder in those who contemplate
its organisation. (27) And it is ‘Pan’ as well, since it is identical with everything. He is hairy and
goat-like in his lower parts because of the roughness of the earth; his upper parts have the form
of a human, because the ruling part of the cosmos, which is rational, is in the aether. He is
traditionally held to be lecherous and lewd because of the number both of the seminal principles
it possesses, and of the things that come about from their intermingling. He passes much of his
time in the wilderness because it was established that he is solitary on this basis of the fact that
the cosmos is single and unique. He pursues Nymphs, because it rejoices in the moist
exhalations of the earth, without which it could not be constituted. His skittish and playful
nature points to the ceaseless motion of the universe. He is clad in fawn-skin or leopard-skin
because of the variety of the stars, and of the other things which are observed [50] in it.5 He is
said to play the pan-pipes, perhaps because it is swept by all sorts of winds; or perhaps because
they sound wild and austere, and is not just for making a show. Because he spends time on
mountains and in caves, the pine-wreath was associated with him – the pine being an impressive
tree associated with mountains. Also associated with him are the sudden and irrational
disturbances called panic-attacks: for this is how sheep and goats are frightened when they hear
a sound from the wood or from underground caverns and in places where there are ravines. It
was appropriate that they should have made him guardian of the young of the herds; and it is
perhaps because of this that they depict him with horns and cloven hooves; and perhaps they
were hinting at his double nature in his protruding ears. Perhaps it is ‘Priapus’ as well, by which
all things come into the light – the ancients thus suggesting in a superstitious and grandiose way
what they thought about the nature of the cosmos. Anyway, the size of his genitals shows the
abundant seminal power that is in god, while the collection of fruits held in the folds of his
cloak indicates the wealth of fruits that grow in the bosom of the land and come forth in due
season. Traditionally, he is guardian of orchards and vineyards, [51] since it the job of the
parent to preserve what he has brought into being (Zeus too thence being said to be Preserver):
vineyards suggest bounty and purity, but fruits suggest more especially variety, pleasure and
making generation easy – he mostly dressed that way as well. And he holds out a sickle in his
right hand, either because this is used for pruning vines, or because he is guarding something
and is armed to protect it, or because it is the same power that, after bringing things into being,
cuts them off and destroys them.
Again, the cosmos is ‘Good Daimon’, he too being laden with fruits; or else he is the
principle which rules it, considered insofar as it divides and shares out what happens, being a
good distributor. He is defender and preserver of household matters because it keeps its own
house in order and at the same time offers itself as an example to others. The ‘horn of
5

Reading χρημάτων for χρωμάτων.

16

Amaltheia’ is an attribute proper to him, because of whom all which are generated in due season
grow at the same time – not that he brings them into being for some single purpose: they crowd
into being for many and various purposes. Or it [sc. the ‘horn of Amaltheia’] might indicate that
the cosmos periodically destroys and [52] again plunders everything; or it might be the
exhortation to labour which comes from him, since good things come to those who are not made
soft.
C.2 Earth (and principles of stability)
(28) Next, my child, we must speak about Demeter and Hestia [sc. ‘hearth’]: both seem to be
none other than the earth. The ancients called this ‘Hestia’ because it is stands firm through
everything; or because it was placed innermost by nature; or because the whole cosmos stands
firm on it as on a foundation. Since it gives birth to everything and nourishes it like a mother,
the ancients called it ‘De-meter’, as if it were Earth-Mother; or else ‘mother Deo’ because the
earth and the things on it ungrudgingly produce what men can divide among themselves and
feast on; or because on it they meet with, i.e. find, what they seek.
Hestia is traditionally a virgin because what is unmoving generates nothing – because of
this, she is also served by virgins. (But Demeter is not also a virgin: she gave birth to ‘Kore’ –
as it were Satiety – she [i.e. Demeter] being the material for one’s being nourished to satiety.)
[53] The eternal fire is associated with Hestia because it too seems to be being; and perhaps
because all the fires in the cosmos are nourished from the earth and subsist because of it; or
because the earth is life-giving and the mother of living things, in which the fiery element is the
cause of life. She is formed circular and set in the middle of the home because the compression
of earth gives it similar shape and setting. This is why the earth is also, imitatively, called
‘chthon’ – but perhaps it was called ‘chthon’ from the fact that it contains or has room for
everything, as in the line: ‘This road will contain us both’. Mythology tells that she is first and
last because the things that were born from the earth and sustained by it are dissolved into it;
and his is also why the Greeks start and end their sacrifices with her. She is garlanded with
white branches because it is crowned, and covered all over, by the whitest element.
Demeter, depicted according to her role in making seeds spring up, is quite
appropriately shown crowned with ears of corn – for of all things whose cultivation benefits
people, corn is the most essential. According to the myth, it was sown throughout the inhabited
world by Triptolemos of Eleusis, [54] mounted by Demeter in a chariot of winged ‘serpents’.
For it seems that there was among the ancients some first man who was mounted by god in a
higher level of thought and saw and understood the use of ‘barley’ – how it is ground and
separated from its husk by being tossed in the air. (For the same reason ‘krios’ is also suited for
sowing.) He took his name from he who grinds the oulai (barley-seeds are called oulai).
‘Eleusis’ is the place where barley-seeds were first discovered, and Demeter is called
‘Eleusinian’ from the fact that human progress to a truly human life began there. There is a
myth that Hades kidnapped the daughter of Demeter, because of the disappearance of the seeds
under the earth for a certain time. (The dejection of the goddess and her search throughout the
cosmos are fictional additions.) Among the Egyptians, Osiris (who is sought and rediscovered
by Isis) suggests the same sort of thing; and among the Phoenicians there is Adonis, who is
alternately above the ground and below the ground for six-month periods –Demeter’s produce

17

being thus called ‘Adonis’ from the fact that people enjoy it. It is said that a wild boar struck
and killed him because pigs are known to devour the crops; or this all hints at the teeth of the
ploughshare, [55] by which seed gets covered in earth. He was assigned to be with Aphrodite
and Persephone for equal periods of time, for the reason we said. They called the daughter of
Demeter ‘Persephone’ because manual labour is hard work and brings hard work; or from the
fact that hard work brings endurance. Fasts are held in honour of Demeter, either as a special
way of presenting her with the first fruits by abstaining for one day from those things given to
people by her, or through pious fear of want when god withdraws within. When they were
sowing, they drew on their own stocks, which is why people hold her festival at the time of
sowing. Around spring they sacrifice to Demeter ‘Chloe’ with games and good cheer, seeing
green shoots which hint at the hope of plenty for them as well. Hence Wealth is thought to be
the son of Demeter, and it is well said that [56] “wealth in grain and barley is best, you fool!”
Being wealthy is in some way the opposite of starving: Hesiod notices this when he says ‘work,
Perses, divine race, so that hunger may hate you, but Demeter of the lovely hair will love you”.
Pregnant sows are, quite appropriately, sacrificed to Demeter: it represents ease in fertility,
conception, and birth. Poppies are dedicated to her for a reason: their round, spherical shape
represents the shape of the earth, which is a globe, while the irregularity on their surface
represents the hollows of the earth and the peaks of the mountains. Its interior is like caves and
mines. They produce countless seeds, like the earth. Because of the plentifulness of corn, men
no longer had any difficulty getting by, and their supply of food was no longer doubtful. This
allowed them to agree with each other about the boundaries of cultivated land, and to distribute
its produce justly; and so they said that Demeter was the originator of their laws and ordinances.
Thus it is that they called her ‘Thesmothetis’, as being a lawgiver – although some people
wrongly think that her crops were called ‘thesmos’ because they are laid aside and treasured. It
was with philosophical intent that they began to celebrate the ‘mysteries’ for her, rejoicing at the
same time in the discovery of things beneficial for life, and in a festival which they used [57] to
bear witness to the fact that they had stopped fighting with each other over the necessities, and
were replete, i.e. satiated. It is plausible that this is why the ‘mysteries’ are so named; and this
is why some people know Demeter as a ‘Mysian’ – or else because matters which are to some
extent difficult to understand need investigation. (29) For this same reason, Zeus is said to have
generated the ‘Seasons’ from Themis: they take care of and guard all good things we have. One
of them is called ‘Eunomia’, from the distribution of the things that fall to us; one is ‘Dike’ [i.e.
Justice], because she gets those who are at variance apart from one another; one is ‘Eirene’
[Peace], from judgements made through words not weapons: for they called the language of
reason “peace”. (‘War’ is so named from the fact that many are destroyed; or from the hurry to
lay hands on each other that comes upon enemies.
(30) It is appropriate that Dionysus was thought of as peace in some sense as well, since
he is the overseer of cultivated trees and a generous god – and this explains why “libations” are
made: for the countryside is deforested in wartime, but feasting, which requires wine above all
else, thrives in peace. And ‘Dionysus’ is either ‘Dionuxos’ or [58] as it were ‘Dianusos’ –
named from the fact that we weep with pleasure; or else it is as if it is ‘Dialusos’, which is the
origin of their calling him Looser or Deliverer, releasing us from our cares. Some say that his
name has entered common usage from the fact that Zeus first made the vine appear on mount
Nysios. He is said to have been born thanks to fire (a story which refers to the fact that his heat

18

warms body and soul – for wine really does have the strength of fire, as the poets say); and he
was stitched into the thigh of Zeus where he came to full term (because wine needs to mellow
and reach maturity) < . . .> since its first birth is the ripening of the grapes in autumn, which
happens when it is hottest, while its second is at the trampling of the grapes, when it is squeezed
out [59] by the feet –and something like this has to be understood from the reference to the
thigh. He is called Bromios and Bacchos and Iacchos and Euios and Babaktes and Iobacchos,
because in the first place people trampling the grapes let out many such cries, as people tend to
do subsequently when they are drunk. The ‘Satyrs’ are a symbol of the playfulness and
distraction of someone their cups: their name comes from grinning. There are also the ‘Skirtoi’,
from dancing; and the ‘Silenoi’ from mocking; and the ‘Seuidai’ from hastening, i.e. rushing.
These perhaps suggest the way in which people who are drinking stagger about in a dissolute
and effeminate way. This is also why he [i.e. Dionysus] is depicted as feminine in appearance –
yet with horns: when drunk, people become lax, but also violent, difficult to control and
impulsive. His bright clothes suggest the colours of autumn; and the fact that he is naked in
most statues suggests the stripping off of affectation, which happens among drinkers, and would
seem to be what is meant by the line “wine and truth”. This might also be why there are places
with an oracle of Dionysus. The noise of tambourines and drums, which are invitations to their
rites, seem appropriate somehow to drunken rowdiness. Often the aulos is also played [60] to
accompany the harvest, along with other such instruments. The thyrsus represents the fact that
people who drink too much wine cannot depend on their own feet, but need something to prop
themselves up. Some of the thyrsoi have spear-heads hidden within the leaves, as if to say that
when the drinking is hard there is sometimes something painful hidden beneath the
cheerfulness, which leads some to fall into violence and frenzy. This is why Dionysus was
called ‘Maddening’, and the women around him ‘Maenads’. He is depicted both as young and
as old, because it [wine] is suitable for any age: more exciting for the young who use it, more
pleasurable for the older. Tradition has it that the Satyrs had intercourse with the nymphs,
seducing some,6 forcing themselves on others for sport. This came about because the mixing of
wine with water was seen to be useful. Leopards were yoked to Dionysus’ chariot and made to
accompany him either because of their colourful skin (just as he himself and the Bacchai wear
fawn skin), or because of the taming effect a moderate amount of wine has on even the wildest
predispositions. Goats are sacrificed to him because it is an animal known to destroy vines and
figs – which is why young farmers in the Attic villages flay it jump on the skin. And perhaps
Dionysus enjoys this sort of sacrifice because the goat is lecherous – the same reason why [61]
the donkey also tends to feature in his processions, and phalli are dedicated to him, and phallic
processions held. For wine moves a person to sex – which is why some people sacrifice to
Dionysus and Aphrodite together. The ‘narthex’, a cane which has stems that twist around,
suggests the way that drunk people stagger all over the place – and are likewise liable to be
swayed and moved. Some say that it stands for the in-articulate nature of their chattering (as if
it is what “has articulation”). The Bacchae wander in the mountains and love the wilderness
because wine is produced not in cities but in the countryside. Dionysus was called
‘Dithyrambos’, either because it draws attention to the double door of the mouth and makes
people blurt out secrets; or because it makes the young go up to doors, or barge into them, i.e.
6

Reading πείσαντες for πειρῶντες.

19

fall against them and dislodge the bolts. (People thought he was destructive of absolutely
everything; also that he was a warrior, and first established the practice of the triumph for
military victories. The ‘triumph’ got its name from the shouting and lampooning, which is why
in military triumphs the crowds use anapaests when they jeer.) The jay is sacred to him [62] as a
chattering bird, and they call him ‘Fox-like’ from to talk, and Eiraphiotes from venting one’s
wrath. He is crowned with ivy because of its resemblance to the vine, and because its flowers
are like clusters of grapes (also it brings down trees, creeping up through them and twining
around their lower parts with some strength). Theatrical performances are put on in the service
of Dionysus because they are appropriate for celebrations – like song and the kithar: “For they
are the offerings of the feast.” There is a myth that Dionysus was torn apart by the Titans and
but back together again by Rhea. The tradition through which this myth comes is hinting that
farmers, who are sons of the soil, gathered in the grapes and separated out the different parts
(“of Dionysus”) in them. They are all brought back together when the must is poured back in,
and a single body is made of them again. There is a clear meaning to the poet’s story that the
god, fleeing a plot of Lycurgus, once submerged himself in the sea where he was saved by
‘Thetis’: vines are the nurses of Dionysus: these Lycurgus, being a vine-gatherer, took as spoil
and carried off; subsequently the wine was mixed with sea-water and safely stored away. So
much for Dionysus.
(31) ‘Heracles’ is universal reason [63] thanks to which nature is strong and mighty,
being indomitable as well: giver of strength and power to its various parts as well. The name
comes, perhaps from the fact that it extends to heroes, and is what makes the noble famous. For
the ancients called heroes those who were so strong in body and soul that they seemed to be part
of a divine race. There is no need to be disturbed by the more recent story: the son of Alkmene
and Amphitryon was deemed worthy of the same name as the god because of his virtue, so that
it has become hard to distinguish what belongs to the god from the stories about the hero. The
lion skin and the club may have originated with ancient theology and been transferred to the
latter – it cannot have seemed right that a good military leader who launched powerful attacks
on many parts of the earth would have gone around naked, armed only with wood: rather, then,
the hero was decorated with these badges of the god when his services had earned him
apotheosis. Both the lion-skin and the club can be a symbol of force and nobility: for the lion is
the most powerful of the beasts, the club the mightiest of weapons. Traditionally, the god is an
archer, because [64] he extends everywhere, and because even the path of his missiles is
somehow unwavering – and it is not an irrational commander who faces his enemies with his
trust in weapons like this. The Koans have a tradition that, appropriately enough, he lived with
Hebe, as if to make him more perfect in intelligence – as it is said: “The hands of the young are
fitter for action, but the souls of the older are better by far.” I suspect that it is more plausible
that the service to Omphale refers to him [sc. the god]: through it, the ancients showed again
that even the strongest ought to submit themselves to reason and to do what it enjoins, even if its
voice (which it would not be extraordinary to call ‘Omphale’) happens to call for the somewhat
feminine activity of contemplation and rational inquiry. It is also possible to explain the Twelve
Labours as referring to the god, as Cleanthes in fact did. But ingenuity should not always win
the day.

20

C.3 Fire
[65] (32) Next, then, my child: Apollo is the sun, and Artemis the moon. This is why they
represent both of them as archers, hinting at how far their rays shoot, as it were. The one, the
sun, is called ‘Hecatos’ while the other is called ‘Hecate’ for this reason: because they shoot
light and send it here from afar. They have likewise also come to be called Hecateboloi. Some
give a different etymology for ‘Hecatos’ and ‘Hecate’, as names given to them by people who
were praying that they be far away and that their harmful effects should not reach them. For
sometime they seem to corrupt the air, and to be responsible for pestilential states – which is
why the ancients attributed sudden deaths to them. And the Poet represents Achilles as saying
during the plague, as if it was something obvious that a soothsayer should be sought “who might
say why Phoebus Apollo raged so much”. Because of this, they think that we are dealing with
euphemisms: ‘Artemis’ being named from making things stable, i.e. healthy, and ‘Apollo’ being
so addressed as delivering us from diseases, or driving them away from us or destroying them.
[66] (This notion led to his being called ‘Paieon’ and considered a physician.) For the same
reason, some say that it [i.e. the sun] was called ‘Apollo’ from to destroy: for this is what
destroys the present world order by continually evaporating the moisture from everywhere in it
and making it part of the aether. So perhaps the name is also from his reducing and
disintegrating the composition of substance – or the darkness as well – as if he were called
‘Haplon’. It is appropriate that they should be presented as brother and sister, since they are like
each other and move in the same pattern and have a similar power in the universe and both alike
nourish things on the earth.
Apollo was represented as male, since fire is warmer and more active; Artemis as
female, being less active and her power being weak. Apollo has the age of a grown boy, when
men appear at their most handsome: for the sun is the most beautiful and youthful thing to see.
Beyond this, he is called ‘Phoebus’ because he is pure and bright. There are other epithets for
him: they apply Golden-Haired and Unshorn to him since the sun [67] looks golden and stands
beyond grief because of its holiness. They called it ‘Delian’ and ‘Phanaian’ because what exists
is revealed by it, and the cosmos lit up – so also they established a temple of ‘Anaphaian’
Apollo, who brings to light all things. It is as a consequence of this that Delos and Anaphe came
to be considered his shrines. Because of the afore-mentioned elucidation of things, he was
associated with prophecy; and when the oracle in Delphi was discovered they gave Apollo the
epithet ‘Pythian’, since people come here to learn things that concern themselves. The place
was called the ‘navel’ of the world, not because it is right in the middle of it, but because the
oracular voice, which is the speech of god, was given out there. Because the oracles it gives are
oblique and difficult, he was called ‘Loxias’ – or because of the oblique course [sc. of the sun]
through the zodiacal circle. He has been represented as a musician and kithar-player because it
strikes every part of the cosmos tunefully and makes it harmonious in all of its parts: none of
them, of all that exists, can be considered out of tune. Rather, it preserves to the highest degree,
as if rhythmically, a mutual balance in the timings of things – as it does the voices of living
creatures, [68] and indeed the sounds made by all other bodies, since it produces the necessary

21

air through its drying action, and makes it wonderfully adapted to hearing.7 This is the origin of
his being called Leader of the Muses and their guardian; and he himself was thought to play
with the Muses: “For from the Muses and Far-Darting Apollo men are singers on earth, and
kings,” says Hesiod. And this is the reason why the swan is sacred to him: it is at the same time
the most musical and the whitest of birds; but the crow is alien to him because it is foul, and
because of its colour. The ‘laurel’ is his garland since, although it is somewhat tawny in colour,
it is a vigorous evergreen plant. It happens to be the most flammable as well, and is somehow
appropriate for purification rites, so its dedication to the purest and most fiery god is not
inappropriate. And perhaps its name, which is a bit like making clear, made it seem that the
plant should be associated with prophecy. [69] The tripod is dedicated to Apollo because the
number three is perfect. It might also be to do with the three concentric circles, one of which is
cut by the sun as it moves through its yearly course, while the other two are touched by it.
Because it mostly seems to happen that the young are the first to get sick when there is a plague
and are ill for longer, or perish by themselves of the plague, they dedicated the care of flocks to
him, calling him God of the Pasture, Lycian and Wolf-Killer. And he was called ‘Aguieus’, of
course, where his statue was set up in the streets: for he illuminates them and fills them with
light as he rises – as, conversely, it is said: “The sun sets, and all the streets were darkened.”
They also called him ‘Leschenorios’ because people spend their days in public buildings,
mingling with each other; but the nights they spend resting by themselves. They called him
‘Healer’ – whether, indeed, by antithesis, to appease him, so that he should not send diseases to
them or corrupt the air they breathed; or whether it was because he is in fact himself the cause
of bodily health, [70] by making the immediate environment well-tempered. (33) Consequently,
Asclepius was said to be his son. He was thought to have handed the art of medicine to mankind
– for in this field too some knowledge of the divine was necessary. ‘Asclepius’ was named from
his healing softly, and putting off the stiffness that comes about at death. This is why they
dedicated the snake to him: it shows that those who benefit from medicine experience
something like the snake in becoming as it were rejuvenated after their disease, and putting off
old age. At the same time, the snake is a symbol of careful attention, of which much is needed
in medical treatment. The staff seems to be a symbol of something of the sort as well: the
suggestion made by it is that we would fall into illness constantly if we did not rely on medical
understanding, and, deprived of what we needed, would collapse more quickly. ‘Chiron’ is said
to have nurtured Asclepius and to have trained him in the science of medicine, [71] thanks to
people who wanted to show that the exercise of an art is through the hands. The wife of
Asclepius, according to tradition, is ‘Epione’ – a name which was not idly incorporated into
mythology idly: it points out how distresses are soothed through gentle medicine.
(34) Artemis acquired the epithet ‘Phosphoros’ because it [i.e. the moon] too emits light
and illuminates the surroundings to some extent, especially when it is a full moon. She is called
‘Dictynna’ from its shooting out rays of light – for to cast is to shoot; or else from the fact that
her power reaches everything on earth, as if she were ‘Diiktynes’. She was represented as
‘Huntress’ and ‘Beast-slayer’ and ‘Deer-shooter’ and ‘Mountain-wanderer’ either because
people wanted to deflect the harm that comes from it onto wild beasts; or because it shines
Reading: καὶ τὰς τῶν ζῴων φωνάς, ὡς αὖ τοὺς τῶν ἄλλων σωμάτων ψόφους, διὰ τὸ ξηραίνεσθαι
χρησίμως ὑπ' <αὐτοῦ> τὸν ἀέρα ἀποδιδόντος καὶ δαιμονίως ἡρμόσθαι πρὸς τὰς ἀκοὰς ποιοῦντος. (cf. von
Arnim, SVF 1.503).
7

22

during the night in particular and everywhere is very peaceful during the night – as peaceful as
woods and deserts, which thus seem appropriate haunts for her. (To this was added the fiction
that she uses her archery to hunt; and it is of a piece with this that dogs came to be thought
sacred to her, [72] since they are suitable for hunting – and they stay awake at night and bark.
And it resembles a hunt with hounds in the way that it never leaves off sometimes pursuing,
sometimes fleeing the sun; also in the way that “chases” the animals in the zodiac and swiftly
catches them up – speed being something associated with a hunt as well.) They said that she is
busied about the mountain-tops since it is the nearest of the heavenly bodies to earth. Hecate,
who is the same as Artemis, is represented as three in form because the moon makes three kinds
of shape: it is in turns crescent-shaped and ‘full’; and then they represent it, thirdly, taking on
another shape, when the crescent is filled but it is not quite a circle. This is why she was called
‘Goddess of the Forked Way’ and was thought to look over forks in the road: it is because of the
threefold change it undergoes as it journeys through the zodiac. And since the sun only shines
during the day, but it [i.e. the moon] is also seen at night and in the dark, and what is more is
seen changing, they called her ‘Goddess of the Night’ and ‘Night-Wanderer’ and ‘Chthonian’;
and they started to worship her in company with the chthonian deities, and introducing dinners
in her honour. The fiction was added that it pollutes this earth, and pollutes it [73] as the dead
do, and that she helps witches and plots with them against households; and finally that she
rejoices in grief and slaughter – which is what led some people to want to propitiate her with
unusual sacrifices and human slaughter. The ‘mullet’ is sacred to her because of its name. She is
called ‘Enodia’ for exactly the reason that Apollo is called ‘Aguieus’. Most people think that
Artemis is the same as ‘Eileithuia’, who unceasingly turns and rushes around the earth. Those in
labour pray that she should come to them as ‘Gentle’ and ‘Looser of the Girdle’, as she loosens
the constriction of the womb so that the child that has been conceived might fall out easily and
without labour. So she is called ‘Eleutho’ too. Tradition has it that there is more than one
Eileuthuia, for just the same reason that there is more than one Eros: for the births experienced
by women are as varied as lovers’ desires. Obviously, the moon brings to term creatures that
have been conceived, and it is due to her that they grow and are released from their carriers
when ready. There is nothing extraordinary in the fact that people thought of Artemis in one
sense as a virgin, pure and holy like the sun; in another [74] as assistant to those giving birth,
responsible for the safe delivery of children; and in a third sense as somewhat terrifying and
baleful, which is the notion we said was behind Hecate.
C.4 Air
(35) Finally, the air which receives souls is ‘Hades’, as I said, so called because it is unseen: it is
because things beneath the earth are not apparent to us that they put it about that the dead go
there. Hades is said to be ‘famous’ because this air is the cause of hearing: sound is air that has
been struck. Despair led them to call him ‘Prudent’ and ‘The Prudent One’: the idea was that he
plans well for men by bringing an end at some time to their toils and cares. His epithets include:
‘Much-Receiving’ and ‘Receptive of Much’ and ‘Ruler over Many’ because he receives many
and rules over the so-called majority or the many. The Poet called him ‘Gate-Keeper’ as holding
his gates tightly closed and letting none out. ‘Charon’ was perhaps named by antithesis from
joy; but it might be that its etymology is contain or gape – or yawn. ‘Acheron’ and the

23

‘Acherousian’ lake came about because of the sorrows which come to the dead. It is clear where
the names of ‘Kokytus’ and ‘Pyriphlegethon’ come from: [75] the Greeks of old used to burn
their corpses and raise a wail. Because of this they also called the dead ‘daemons’, which comes
from burning as well. The ‘Birdless’ Lake perhaps has its name with some regard to science
from air; although sometimes the ancients called darkness and mist ‘air’ as well – unless, by
Zeus, they were appealing to the grey-green of the air, which it shares with the so-called gladioli
with which they garland Pluto. They also garland him with ‘maidenhair’, as a reminder that the
dead dry out and no longer hold moisture, and are deprived of the water that is needed to
breathe and flourish. This is why myths call them ‘corpses’: the dead are in Hades because they
lack a share in the wet. The ‘narcissus’ was appropriately associated with the dead, and they said
that it was the wreath of the Erinnyes, noting its similarity to numbness – and because the dead
grow as it were numb.
D. Epilogue
In the same way, my child, you can apply [76] these basic models to everything else that comes
down through mythology concerning those considered to be gods, in the conviction that the
ancients were far from mediocre, but were capable of understanding the nature of the cosmos
and ready to express their philosophical account of it in symbols and enigmas. It has all been
said at greater length and in more detail by earlier philosophers, but I wanted now to pass it on
to you in abbreviated form: facility with the subject is useful even to this extent. When the
young are being taught to sacrifice and pray, and worship and swear oaths in the right way and
in the appropriate circumstances (according to the sense of proportion you adopt for yourself) –
you will come to grasp both your ancestral traditions about these things (the gods and their cults
and everything that exists for their honour), and also an unblemished account of them, so that
they will lead you only to piety, and not to superstition.

24

