Tot em and Taboo
‘Freud has told us that for him all natural science, medicine, and psychotherapy were a lifelong journey round
and back to the early passion of his youth for the
history of mankind, for the origins of religion and morality – an interest which at the height of his career broke
out to such magniﬁcent effect in Totem and Taboo.’
Thomas Mann
‘Relations between social anthropology and psychology are still ill-deﬁned and unstable. But in any resolution of them the work of psychoanalysts must be
taken very seriously into account. It is very useful, then,
to have this new translation of the pioneer work.’
Nature
‘Freud had a strong element of the artist in his composition. Nearly all his work was well translated into
English, with one glaring exception: Totem and Taboo.
Now, at last . . . justice has been done. . . . The book
itself is one of the most fascinating and characteristic,
and also of the most speculative, in the whole Freudian
canon.’
Books of the Month

Sigmund

Freud
Totem and Taboo
Some Points of Agreement between the
Mental Lives of Savages and Neurotics

Authorized translation by James Strachey

London and New York

First published 1913 by Hugo Heller
English edition ﬁrst published in the United Kingdom 1919
by George Routledge & Sons
This translation ﬁrst published 1950 by Routledge & Kegan Paul
First published in Routledge Classics 2001
by Routledge
11 New Fetter Lane, London EC4P 4EE
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2004.
Translation © 1950 Routledge & Kegan Paul
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted
or reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic,
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter
invented, including photocopying and recording, or in
any information storage or retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the publishers.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN 0-203-16470-9 Master e-book ISBN

ISBN 0-203-25893-2 (Adobe eReader Format)
ISBN 0–415–25387–X (Print Edition)

C ONTENTS

Translator’s Note
Preface
Preface to the Hebrew Translation

vii
ix
xiii

The Horror of Incest
Taboo and Emotional Ambivalence
Animism, Magic and the Omnipotence of
Thoughts
The Return of Totemism in Childhood

87
116

List of Works referred to in the Text
Index

188
195

1
2
3
4

1
21

T RANSLATOR’S N OTE

As Freud explains in his own preface, the four essays comprised
in this volume were originally published in the pages of the
periodical Imago (Vienna) under the title ‘Über einige Übereinstimmungen im Seelenleben der Wilden und der Neurotiker’
[‘On Some Points of Agreement between the Mental Lives of
Savages and Neurotics’]—the ﬁrst and second essays in Vol. I
(1912) and the third and fourth in Vol. II (1913). All four essays
were collected and published under the new title of Totem und Tabu
in 1913 (Vienna, Hugo Heller). New editions appeared in 1920,
1922 and 1934 and the work was included in Volume X of
Freud’s Gesammelte Schriften (Vienna, 1924) and as Volume IX of
his Gesammelte Werke (London, 1940). None of these later editions
show any variations of substance from the original one. An English translation by A. A. Brill was published in New York in 1918
(London, 1919). The book has also been translated into Hungarian (1918), Spanish (1923), Portuguese (n.d.), French (1924),
Japanese (twice, 1930 and 1934) and Hebrew (1939). The last
of these was introduced by a specially written preface, which,

viii translator’s note
on account of its particular interest, I have included in this
volume.
For the purposes of the present, entirely new, version I have
made an eﬀort to verify all quotations and references so far as
possible; and I have put right a considerable number of inaccuracies which had crept into the German editions. Particulars of all
works referred to in the text will be found in a list at the end of
the volume. The responsibility for any matter printed between
square brackets is mine.
My grateful thanks are due to Miss Anna Freud for her critical
revision of the entire translation, and to Mr. Roger Money-Kyrle
for reading through the typescript and making many helpful
suggestions.
J. S.

P REFACE

The four essays that follow were originally published (under a
heading which serves as the present book’s sub-title) in the ﬁrst
two volumes of Imago, a periodical issued under my direction.
They represent a ﬁrst attempt on my part at applying the point of
view and the ﬁndings of psycho-analysis to some unsolved problems of social psychology [Völkerpsychologie]. Thus they oﬀer a
methodological contrast on the one hand to Wilhelm Wundt’s
extensive work, which applies the hypotheses and working
methods of non-analytic psychology to the same purposes, and
on the other hand to the writings of the Zurich school of
psycho-analysis, which endeavour, on the contrary, to solve the
problems of individual psychology with the help of material
derived from social psychology. (Cf. Jung, 1912 and 1913.) I
readily confess that it was from these two sources that I received
the ﬁrst stimulus for my own essays.
I am fully conscious of the deﬁciencies of these studies. I need
not mention those which are necessarily characteristic of pioneering work; but others require a word of explanation. The four

x

preface

essays collected in these pages aim at arousing the interest of a
fairly wide circle of educated readers, but they cannot in fact be
understood and appreciated except by those few who are no
longer strangers to the essential nature of psycho-analysis. They
seek to bridge the gap between students of such subjects as
social anthropology, philology and folklore on the one hand,
and psycho-analysts on the other. Yet they cannot oﬀer to either
side what each lacks—to the former an adequate initiation into
the new psychological technique or to the latter a suﬃcient
grasp of the material that awaits treatment. They must therefore
rest content with attracting the attention of the two parties and
with encouraging a belief that occasional co-operation between
them could not fail to be of beneﬁt to research.
It will be found that the two principal themes from which the
title of this little book is derived—totems and taboos—have not
received the same treatment. The analysis of taboos is put forward as an assured and exhaustive attempt at the solution of the
problem. The investigation of totemism does no more than
declare that ‘here is what psycho-analysis can at the moment
contribute towards elucidating the problem of the totem’. The
diﬀerence is related to the fact that taboos still exist among us.
Though expressed in a negative form and directed towards
another subject-matter, they do not diﬀer in their psychological
nature from Kant’s ‘categorical imperative’, which operates in a
compulsive fashion and rejects any conscious motives. Totemism, on the contrary, is something alien to our contemporary
feelings—a religio-social institution which has been long abandoned as an actuality and replaced by newer forms. It has left
only the slightest traces behind it in the religions, manners and
customs of the civilized peoples of to-day and has been subject
to far-reaching modiﬁcations even among the races over which
it still holds sway. The social and technical advances in human
history have aﬀected taboos far less than the totem.
An attempt is made in this volume to deduce the original

preface

meaning of totemism from the vestiges remaining of it in
childhood—from the hints of it which emerge in the course of
the growth of our own children. The close connection between
totems and taboos carries us a step further along the path
towards the hypothesis presented in these pages; and if in the
end that hypothesis bears a highly improbable appearance, that
need be no argument against the possibility of its approximating
more or less closely to the reality which it is so hard to
reconstruct.
R, September 1913.

xi

P REFACE TO THE H EBREW T RANSLATION 1

No reader of [the Hebrew version of] this book will ﬁnd it easy
to put himself in the emotional position of an author who is
ignorant of the language of holy writ, who is completely
estranged from the religion of his fathers—as well as from every
other religion—and who cannot take a share in nationalist
ideals, but who has yet never repudiated his people, who feels
that he is in his essential nature a Jew and who has no desire to
alter that nature. If the question were put to him: ‘Since you have
abandoned all these common characteristics of your countrymen, what is there left to you that is Jewish?’ he would reply: ‘A
very great deal, and probably its very essence.’ He could not now
express that essence clearly in words; but some day, no doubt, it
will become accessible to the scientiﬁc mind.
Thus it is an experience of a quite special kind for such
an author when a book of his is translated into the Hebrew
[This preface was ﬁrst published in German in Ges. Werke, 12, 385 (1934). It
was then stated that a Hebrew translation was about to be published in Jerusalem by Stybel. Actually it was not published there until 1939, by Kirjcith Zefer.]
1

xiv preface to the hebrew translation
language and put into the hands of readers for whom that historic idiom is a living tongue: a book, moreover, which deals
with the origin of religion and morality, though it adopts no
Jewish standpoint and makes no exceptions in favour of Jewry.
The author hopes, however, that he will be at one with his
readers in the conviction that unprejudiced science cannot
remain a stranger to the spirit of the new Jewry.
V, December 1930.

1
THE HORROR OF INCEST
Prehistoric man, in the various stages of his development, is
known to us through the inanimate monuments and implements which he has left behind, through the information about
his art, his religion and his attitude towards life which has come
to us either directly or by way of tradition handed down in
legends, myths and fairy tales, and through the relics of his
mode of thought which survive in our own manners and customs. But apart from this, in a certain sense he is still our contemporary. There are men still living who, as we believe, stand
very near to primitive man, far nearer than we do, and whom we
therefore regard as his direct heirs and representatives. Such is
our view of those whom we describe as savages or half-savages;
and their mental life must have a peculiar interest for us if we are
right in seeing in it a well-preserved picture of an early stage of
our own development.
If that supposition is correct, a comparison between the
psychology of primitive peoples, as it is taught by social anthropology, and the psychology of neurotics, as it has been revealed

2

totem and taboo

by psycho-analysis, will be bound to show numerous points of
agreement and will throw new light upon familiar facts in both
sciences.
For external as well as for internal reasons, I shall select as the
basis of this comparison the tribes which have been described by
anthropologists as the most backward and miserable of savages,
the aborigines of Australia, the youngest continent, in whose
fauna, too, we can still observe much that is archaic and that has
perished elsewhere.
The Australian aborigines are regarded as a distinct race,
showing neither physical nor linguistic relationship with their
nearest neighbours, the Melanesian, Polynesian and Malayan
peoples. They do not build houses or permanent shelters; they
do not cultivate the soil; they keep no domesticated animals
except the dog; they are not even acquainted with the art of
making pottery. They live entirely upon the ﬂesh of all kinds of
animals which they hunt, and upon roots which they dig. Kings
or chiefs are unknown among them; communal aﬀairs are
decided by a council of elders. It is highly doubtful whether any
religion, in the shape of a worship of higher beings, can be
attributed to them. The tribes in the interior of the continent,
who have to struggle against the hardest conditions of existence
as a result of the scarcity of water, appear to be more primitive in
all respects than those living near the coast.
We should certainly not expect that the sexual life of these
poor, naked cannibals would be moral in our sense or that their
sexual instincts would be subjected to any great degree of restriction. Yet we ﬁnd that they set before themselves with the most
scrupulous care and the most painful severity the aim of avoiding incestuous sexual relations. Indeed, their whole social organization seems to serve that purpose or to have been brought into
relation with its attainment.
Among the Australians the place of all the religious and social

the horror of incest

institutions which they lack is taken by the system ‘totemism’.
Australian tribes fall into smaller divisions, or clans, each of
which is named after its totem. What is a totem? It is as a rule an
animal (whether edible and harmless or dangerous and feared)
and more rarely a plant or a natural phenomenon (such as rain
or water), which stands in a peculiar relation to the whole clan.
In the ﬁrst place, the totem is the common ancestor of the clan;
at the same time it is their guardian spirit and helper, which
sends them oracles and, if dangerous to others, recognizes and
spares its own children. Conversely, the clansmen are under a
sacred obligation (subject to automatic sanctions) not to kill or
destroy their totem and to avoid eating its ﬂesh (or deriving
beneﬁt from it in other ways). The totemic character is inherent,
not in some individual animal or entity, but in all the individuals
of a given class. From time to time festivals are celebrated at
which the clansmen represent or imitate the motions and
attributes of their totem in ceremonial dances.
The totem may be inherited either through the female or
through the male line. It is possible that originally the former
method of descent prevailed everywhere and was only subsequently replaced by the latter. An Australian’s relation to his
totem is the basis of all his social obligations: it overrides on the
one hand his tribal membership and on the other hand his blood
relationships.1
The totem is not attached to one particular place. The clansmen are distributed in diﬀerent localities and live peacefully side
by side with members of other totem clans.2
1

‘The Totem bond is stronger than the bond of blood or family in the modern
sense.’ (Frazer, 1910, 1, 53.)
2
This highly condensed summary of the totemic system must necessarily be
subject to further comments and qualiﬁcations. The word ‘totem’ was ﬁrst
introduced in 1791 (in the form ‘totam’) from the North American Indians by
an Englishman, J. Long. The subject itself has gradually attracted great scientiﬁc
interest and has produced a copious literature, from which I may select as

3

4

totem and taboo

And now we come at last to the characteristic of the totemic
system which has attracted the interest of psycho-analysts. In
almost every place where we ﬁnd totems we also ﬁnd a law
against persons of the same totem having sexual relations with

works of capital importance J. G. Frazer’s four-volume Totemism and Exogamy
(1910) and the writings of Andrew Lang, e.g. The Secret of the Totem (1905). The
merit of having been the ﬁrst to recognize the importance of totemism for
human prehistory lies with a Scotsman, John Ferguson McLennan (1869–70).
Totemic institutions were, or still are, to be observed in operation, not only
among the Australians, but also among the North American Indians, among
the peoples of Oceania, in the East Indies and in a large part of Africa. It may
also be inferred from certain vestigial remains, for which it is otherwise hard to
account, that totemism existed at one time among the Aryan and Semitic
aboriginal races of Europe and Asia. Many investigators are therefore inclined
to regard it as a necessary phase of human development which has been passed
through universally.
How did prehistoric men come to adopt totems? How, that is, did they come
to make the fact of their being descended from one animal or another the basis
of their social obligations and, as we shall see presently, of their sexual restrictions? There are numerous theories on the subject—of which Wundt (1906
[264 ﬀ.]) has given an epitome for German readers—but no agreement. It is
my intention to devote a special study before long to the problem of totemism,
in which I shall attempt to solve it by the help of a psycho-analytic line of
approach. (See the fourth essay in this volume.)
Not only, however, is the theory of totemism a matter of dispute; the facts
themselves are scarcely capable of being expressed in general terms as I have
tried to do in the text above. There is scarcely a statement which does not call
for exceptions or contradictions. But it must not be forgotten that even the
most primitive and conservative races are in some sense ancient races and have a
long past history behind them during which their original conditions of life
have been subject to much development and distortion. So it comes about that
in those races in which totemism exists to-day, we may ﬁnd it in various stages
of decay and disintegration or in the process of transition to other social and
religious institutions, or again in a stationary condition which may diﬀer
greatly from the original one. The diﬃculty in this last case is to decide
whether we should regard the present state of things as a true picture of the
signiﬁcant features of the past or as a secondary distortion of them.

the horror of incest

one another and consequently against their marrying.1 This,
then, is ‘exogamy’, an institution related to totemism.
Strictly enforced as it is, this prohibition is a remarkable one.
There is nothing in the concept or attributes of the totem which
I have so far mentioned to lead us to anticipate it; so that it is
hard to understand how it has become involved in the totemic
system. We cannot, therefore, feel surprised that some investigators actually suppose that exogamy had originally—in the earliest
times and in its true meaning—nothing to do with totemism,
but became attached to it (without there being any underlying
connection) at some time when marriage restrictions became
necessary. However this may be, the bond between totemism
and exogamy exists and is clearly a very ﬁrm one.
Some further considerations will make the signiﬁcance of this
prohibition clearer:
(a) The violation of the prohibition is not left to what might
be called the ‘automatic’ punishment of the guilty parties, as in
the case of other totem prohibitions, such as that against killing
the totem animal. It is avenged in the most energetic fashion by
the whole clan, as though it were a question of averting some
danger that threatened the whole community or some guilt that
was pressing upon it. A few sentences from Frazer (1910, 1, 54)
will show how severely such misdeeds are treated by savages
who are otherwise far from being moral by our standards:
‘In Australia the regular penalty for sexual intercourse with a
person of a forbidden clan is death. It matters not whether the
woman be of the same local group or has been captured in war
from another tribe; a man of the wrong clan who uses her as his
wife is hunted down and killed by his clansmen, and so is the
woman; though in some cases, if they succeed in eluding capture
for a certain time, the oﬀence may be condoned. In the Ta-ta-thi
tribe, New South Wales, in the rare cases which occur, the man is
1

[This sentence is in spaced type in the original.]

5

6

totem and taboo

killed but the woman is only beaten or speared, or both, till she
is nearly dead; the reason given for not actually killing her
being that she was probably coerced. Even in casual amours the
clan prohibitions are strictly observed; any violations of these
prohibitions “are regarded with the utmost abhorrence and are
punished by death”.’ [Quoted from Cameron (1885, 351.)]
(b) Since the same severe punishment is inﬂicted in the case of
passing love-aﬀairs which have not resulted in any children, it
seems unlikely that the reasons for the prohibition are of a
practical nature.
(c) Since totems are hereditary and not changed by marriage,
it is easy to follow the consequences of the prohibition. Where,
for instance, descent is through the female line, if a man of the
Kangaroo totem marries a woman of the Emu totem, all the
children, both boys and girls, belong to the Emu clan. The totem
regulation will therefore make it impossible for a son of this
marriage to have incestuous intercourse with his mother or
sisters, who are Emus like himself.1
(d) But a little more reﬂection will show that exogamy linked
with the totem eﬀects more (and therefore aims at more) than
the prevention of incest with a man’s mother and sisters. It
makes sexual intercourse impossible for a man with all the
women of his own clan (that is to say with a number of women
who are not his blood-relatives) by treating them all as though
they were his blood-relatives. It is diﬃcult at ﬁrst sight to see the
1

On the other hand, at all events so far as this prohibition is concerned, the
father, who is a Kangaroo, is free to commit incest with his daughters, who are
Emus. If the totem descended through the male line, however, the Kangaroo
father would be prohibited from incest with his daughters (since all his children would be Kangaroos), whereas the son would be free to commit incest
with his mother. These implications of totem prohibitions suggest that descent
through the female line is older than that through the male, since there are
grounds for thinking that totem prohibitions were principally directed against
the incestuous desires of the son.

the horror of incest

psychological justiﬁcation for this very extensive restriction,
which goes far beyond anything comparable among civilized
peoples. It may be gathered from this, however, that the part
played by the totem as common ancestor is taken very seriously.
All those who are descended from the same totem are bloodrelations. They form a single family, and within that family even
the most distant degree of kinship is regarded as an absolute
hindrance to sexual intercourse.
We see, then, that these savages have an unusually great horror
of incest, or are sensitive on the subject to an unusual degree,
and that they combine this with a peculiarity which remains
obscure to us—of replacing real blood-relationship by totem
kinship. This latter contrast must not, however, be too much
exaggerated, and we must remember that the totem prohibitions
include that against real incest as a special case.
The riddle of how it came about that the real family was replaced
by the totem clan must perhaps remain unsolved till the nature of
the totem itself can be explained. At the same time, it is to be
observed that if there were a certain degree of freedom of sexual
intercourse outside marriage, blood-relationship, and consequently the prevention of incest, would become so uncertain
that the prohibition would stand in need of a wider basis. It is
therefore worth remarking that Australian customs permit the
occurrence, in certain social situations and during certain festivals,
of breaches in a man’s exclusive conjugal rights over a woman.
Linguistic usage in these Australian tribes1 exhibits a peculiarity which is no doubt relevant here. For the terms used by
them to express the various degrees of kinship do not denote a
relation between two individuals but between an individual and
a group. This is what L. H. Morgan [1877] named the ‘classiﬁcatory’ system of relationship. Thus a man uses the term ‘father’
not only for his actual procreator but also for all the other men
1

As well as in most other totemic communities.

7

8

totem and taboo

whom his mother might have married according to tribal law
and who therefore might have procreated him; he uses the term
‘mother’ not only for the woman who actually bore him but also
for all the other women who might have borne him without
transgressing the tribal law; he uses the terms ‘brother’ and
‘sister’ not only for the children of his actual parents but also for
the children of all those persons who stand in the relation of
parents to him in the classiﬁcatory sense; and so on. Thus the
kinship terms which two Australians apply to each other do not
necessarily indicate any consanguinity, as ours would do: they
represent social rather than physical relationships. Something
approaching the classiﬁcatory system is to be found among us
when, for instance, children are encouraged to refer to all their
parents’ friends as ‘Uncle’ or ‘Aunt’, or when we speak in a
metaphorical sense of ‘brothers in Apollo’ or ‘sisters in Christ’.
Though this use of words strikes us as so puzzling, it is easily
explained if we look on it as a survival of the marriage institution which the Rev. L. Fison has called ‘group marriage’ and
which consists in a certain number of men exercising conjugal
rights over a certain number of women. The children of such a
group marriage would then justly regard one another as brothers
and sisters (though they were not all born of the same mother)
and would regard all the men in the group as their fathers.
Though some authors, such as Westermarck (1901), have
disputed the conclusions which others have drawn from the
existence of the classiﬁcatory system of relationship, those who
have the closest acquaintance with the Australian natives are
agreed in regarding that system as a survival from the days of
group marriage. Indeed, according to Spencer and Gillen (1899
[64]), a certain form of group marriage exists to this day in the
Urabunna and Dieri tribes. Group marriage thus preceded individual marriage among these peoples, and after its disappearance
left deﬁnite traces behind both in language and customs.
But when once we have put group marriage in the place of

the horror of incest

individual marriage, the apparently excessive degree of avoidance of incest which we have come across among the same
peoples becomes intelligible. Totemic exogamy, the prohibition
of sexual intercourse between members of the same clan,
appears to have been the appropriate means for preventing
group incest; it thus became established and persisted long after
its raison d’être had ceased.
It may seem that we have thus discovered the motives that led
the Australian natives to set up their marriage restrictions; but
we have now to learn that the actual state of aﬀairs reveals a far
greater, and at ﬁrst sight a bewildering, complexity. For there are
few races in Australia in which the totem barrier is the sole
prohibition. Most of them are organized in such a way as to fall
into two divisions, known as marriage-classes or ‘phratries’.
Each of these phratries is exogamous and comprises a number of
totem clans. As a rule each phratry is further subdivided into two
‘sub-phratries’, the whole tribe being thus divided into four,
with the sub-phratries intermediate between the phratries and
the totem clans.
The following diagram represents the typical organization of
an Australian tribe and corresponds to the actual situation in a
very large number of cases:

Here the twelve totem clans are divided into four subphratries and two phratries. All the divisions are exogamous.1
1

The number of totems is chosen arbitrarily.

9

10

totem and taboo

Subphratries c and e form an exogamous unit; and so also do
subphratries d and f. The result (and therefore the purpose) of
these arrangements cannot be doubted: they bring about a still
further restriction on the choice of marriage and on sexual liberty. Let us suppose that each clan contains an equal number of
members. Then, if only the twelve totem clans existed, each
–– of all the
member of a clan would have his choice among 11
12
women in the tribe. The existence of the two phratries reduces
6
1
his choice to ––
12 or –2, for then a man of totem a can only marry a
woman of totems 1 to 6. With the introduction of the four
3
1
subphratries his choice is still further reduced to ––
12 or –4, for in
that case a man of totem a is restricted in his choice of a wife to a
woman of totems 4, 5 or 6.
The historical relation between the marriage-classes (of
which in some tribes there are as many as eight) and the totem
clans is completely obscure. It is merely evident that these
arrangements are directed towards the same aim as totemic
exogamy and pursue it still further. While, however, totemic
exogamy gives one the impression of being a sacred ordinance
of unknown origin—in short, of being a custom—the complicated institution of the marriage-classes, with their subdivisions
and the regulations attaching to them, look more like the result
of deliberate legislation, which may perhaps have taken up the
task of preventing incest afresh because the inﬂuence of the
totem was waning. And, while the totemic system is, as we
know, the basis of all the other social obligations and moral
restrictions of the tribe, the signiﬁcance of the phratries seems in
general not to extend beyond the regulation of marriage choice
which is its aim.
The system of marriage-classes in its furthest developments
bears witness to an endeavour to go beyond the prevention of
natural and group incest and to forbid marriage between still
more distant groups of relatives. In this it resembles the Catholic
Church, which extended the ancient prohibition against mar-

the horror of incest

riage between brothers and sisters to marriage between cousins
and even to marriage between those who were merely spiritual
relatives [—godfathers, godmothers and godchildren]. (Cf.
Lang, 1910–11 [87].)
It would be little to our purpose if we were to follow in detail
the extraordinarily involved and obscure discussions on the origin and signiﬁcance of the marriage-classes and on their relation
to the totem. For our purpose it is enough to draw attention to
the great care which is devoted by the Australians, as well as by
other savage peoples, to the prevention of incest.1 It must be
admitted that these savages are even more sensitive on the subject of incest than we are. They are probably liable to a greater
temptation to it and for that reason stand in need of fuller
protection.
But the horror of incest shown by these peoples is not satisﬁed
by the erection of the institutions which I have described and
which seem to be directed principally against group incest. We
must add to them a number of ‘customs’ which regulate the
dealings of individuals with their near relatives in our sense of
the term, customs which are enforced literally with religious
strictness and the purpose of which can scarcely be doubted.
These customs or customary prohibitions have been termed
‘avoidances’. They extend far beyond the totemic races of
Australia; but once again I must ask my readers to be content
with a fragmentary extract from the copious material.
In Melanesia restrictive prohibitions of this sort govern a
boy’s intercourse with his mother and sisters. Thus, for instance,
in Lepers’ Island, one of the New Hebrides, when a boy has
reached a certain age he no longer lives at home, but takes up his
quarters in the ‘club-house’, where he now regularly eats and
sleeps. It is true that he may still go to his father’s house to ask
1

Storfer (1911 [16]) has quite recently insisted on this point.

11

12

totem and taboo

for food, but if his sister is at home he must go away before
eating; if no sister is there he may sit down near the door and eat.
If by chance a brother and sister meet in the open, she must run
away or hide. If a boy knows that certain footprints in the road
are his sister’s, he will not follow them, nor will she follow his.
Indeed, he will not even utter her name, and will avoid the use of
a common word if it forms part of her name. This avoidance
begins with the puberty ceremonies and is maintained throughout life. The reserve between a son and his mother increases as
the boy grows up and is much more on her side than on his. If
his mother brings him food, she does not give it him but puts it
down for him to take. In speaking to him she does not tutoyer
him, but uses the more distant plural forms.1
Similar customs prevail in New Caledonia. If a brother and
sister happen to meet on a path, the sister will throw herself into
the bushes and he will pass on without turning his head.2
Among the natives of the Gazelle Peninsula in New Britain a
sister, after her marriage, is not allowed to converse with her
brother; she never utters his name, but designates him by
another word.3
In New Mecklenburg cousins of one kind are subject to similar restrictions, as are brothers and sisters. They may not come
near each other, may not shake hands and may not give each
other presents; but they are allowed to speak to each other at a
distance of some paces. The penalty for incest with a sister is
death by hanging.4
In Fiji these avoidance rules are particularly strict; they aﬀect
not only blood sisters but tribal sisters as well. It must strike us as
all the more puzzling to hear that these same savages practise
1

Frazer (1910, 2, 77 f.), quoting Codrington (1891, [232]).
[Frazer (1910, 2, 78), quoting Lambert (1900, 114).]
3
Frazer (1910, 2, 124) [quoting Parkinson (1907, 67 f.)].
4
Frazer (1910, 2, 130 f.), quoting Peckel (1908 [467]).
2

the horror of incest

sacred orgies, in which precisely these forbidden degrees of
kinship seek sexual intercourse—puzzling, that is, unless we
prefer to regard the contrast as an explanation of the
prohibition.1
Among the Battas of Sumatra the rules of avoidance apply to
all near relations. ‘A Batta, for example, would think it shocking
were a brother to escort his sister to an evening party. Even in the
presence of others a Batta brother and sister feel embarrassed. If
one of them comes into the house, the other will go away.
Further, a father may never be alone in the house with his daughter, nor a mother with her son. . . . The Dutch missionary who
reports these customs adds that he is sorry to say that from what
he knows of the Battas he believes the maintenance of most of
these rules to be very necessary.’ These people assume as a
matter of course that a solitary meeting between a man and a
woman will lead to an improper intimacy between them. And
since they believe that intercourse between near relations will
lead to punishments and calamities of all sorts, they are right to
avoid any temptation to trangress these prohibitions.2
Curiously enough, among the Barongo of Delagoa Bay, in
South Africa, the strictest rules aﬀect a man’s relations with his
sister-in-law, the wife of his wife’s brother. If he meets this
formidable person anywhere, he carefully avoids her. He does
not eat out of the same dish with her, he speaks to her with
embarrassment, does not venture into her hut and greets her in a
trembling voice.3
A rule of avoidance with which one would have expected to
meet more frequently operates among the A-kamba (or
Wakamba) of British East Africa. A girl has to avoid her father
between the age of puberty and the time of her marriage. If they
Frazer (1910, 2, 146 ﬀ.), quoting Fison [1885, 27 ﬀ.].
Frazer (1910, 2, 189) [quoting Joustra (1902, 391 f.)].
3
Frazer (1910, 2, 388), quoting [Junod 1898, 73 ﬀ.].
1
2

13

14

totem and taboo

meet in the road, she hides while he passes, and she may never
go and sit near him. This holds good until the moment of her
betrothal. After her marriage she does not avoid her father in any
way.1
By far the most widespread and strictest avoidance (and the
most interesting from the point of view of civilized races) is that
which restricts a man’s intercourse with his mother-in-law. It is
quite general in Australia and also extends over Melanesia, Polynesia and the Negro races of Africa, wherever traces of totemism
and the classiﬁcatory system of relationship are found and probably still further. In some of these places there are similar prohibitions against a woman having innocent intercourse with
her father-in-law; but they are far less usual and severe. In a few
isolated cases both parents-in-law are subject to avoidance. Since
we are less concerned in the ethnographical extent of this avoidance than in its substance and purpose, I shall once again restrict
myself to quoting a few examples.
Among the Melanesians of the Banks’ Islands ‘these rules of
avoidance are very strict and minute. A man will not come near
his wife’s mother and she will not come near him. If the two
chance to meet in a path, the woman will step out of it and
stand with her back turned till he has gone by, or perhaps, if it
be more convenient, he will move out of the way. At Vanua Lava,
in Port Patteson, a man would not even follow his mother-inlaw along the beach until the rising tide had washed her footprints from the sand. Yet a man and his mother-in-law may talk
to each other at a distance; but a woman will on no account
mention the name of her daughter’s husband, nor will he name
hers.’2
In the Solomon Islands, after his marriage a man may neither
see nor converse with his mother-in-law. If he meets her, he may
1
2

Frazer (1910, 2, 424) [quoting C. W. Hobley (unpublished MS.)].
Frazer (1910, 2, 76) [quoting Codrington (1891, 42 ﬀ.)].

the horror of incest

not recognize her, but must make oﬀ and hide himself as fast as
he can.1
Among the Eastern Bantu ‘custom requires that a man should
“be ashamed of ” his wife’s mother, that is to say, he must studiously shun her society. He may not enter the same hut with her,
and if by chance they meet on a path, one or other turns aside,
she perhaps hiding behind a bush, while he screens his face with
a shield. If they cannot thus avoid each other, and the mother-inlaw has nothing else to cover herself with, she will tie a wisp of
grass round her head as a token of ceremonial avoidance. All
correspondence between the two has to be carried on either
through a third party or by shouting to each other at a distance
with some barrier, such as the kraal fence, interposed between
them. They may not even pronounce each other’s proper name.’
(Frazer, 1910, 2, 385.)
Among the Basoga, a Bantu people who live in the region of
the sources of the Nile, a man may only speak to his mother-inlaw when she is in another room and out of sight. Incidentally,
these people have such a horror of incest that they punish it even
when it occurs among their domestic animals. (Frazer, 1910, 2,
461.)
While there can be no doubt as to the purpose and signiﬁcance of the other avoidances between near relations, and they
are universally regarded as protective measures against incest,
the prohibitions aﬀecting a man’s intercourse with his motherin-law have received another interpretation in some quarters. It
was with justice regarded as incomprehensible that all these different peoples should feel such great fear of the temptation
presented to a man by an elderly woman, who might have been,
but in fact was not, his mother. (Crawley, 1902, 405.)
This objection was also raised against the view put forward
by Fison [Fison and Howitt, 1880, 104]. He pointed out that
1

Frazer (1910, 2,117), quoting Ribbe (1903 [140 f.]).

15

16

totem and taboo

certain systems of marriage-classes had gaps in them, as a result
of which marriage between a man and his mother-in-law was
not theoretically impossible. For that reason, he suggested, a
special guarantee against that possibility became necessary.
Sir John Lubbock (1870 [84 f.]) traced back the attitude of a
mother-in-law to her son-in-law to the institution of ‘marriage
by capture’. ‘When the capture was a reality’, he writes, ‘the
indignation of the parents would also be real; when it became a
mere symbol, the parental anger would be symbolized also, and
would be continued even after its origin was forgotten.’ Crawley
[1902, 406] has no diﬃculty in showing how insuﬃciently this
attempted explanation covers the details of the observed facts.
Tylor [1889, 246 f.] believes that the treatment given to a sonin-law by his mother-in-law is merely a form of ‘cutting’ or
non-recognition by the wife’s family: the man is regarded as an
‘outsider’ until the ﬁrst child is born. In the ﬁrst place, however,
the prohibition is not always brought to an end when this
occurs. But, apart from this, it may be objected that this explanation throws no light on the fact that the prohibition centres
particularly on the mother-in-law—that is to say, that it overlooks the factor of sex. Moreover it takes no account of the
attitude of religious horror expressed in the prohibition.
(Crawley, 1902, 407.)
A Zulu woman, questioned as to the basis of the prohibition,
gave the sensitive reply: ‘It is not right that he should see the
breasts which suckled his wife.’1
As we know, the relation between son-in-law and mother-inlaw is also one of the delicate points of family organization in
civilized communities. That relation is no longer subject to rules of
avoidance in the social system of the white peoples of Europe
and America; but many disputes and much unpleasantness could
often be eliminated if the avoidance still existed as a custom and
1

Crawley (1902, 401), quoting Leslie (1875 [141]).

the horror of incest

did not have to be re-erected by individuals. It may be regarded
by some Europeans as an act of high wisdom on the part of these
savage races that by their rules of avoidance they entirely precluded any contact between two persons brought into this close
relationship to each other. There is scarcely room for doubt that
something in the psychological relation of a mother-in-law to a
son-in-law breeds hostility between them and makes it hard for
them to live together. But the fact that in civilized societies
mothers-in-law are such a favourite subject for jokes seems to
me to suggest that the emotional relation involved includes
sharply contrasted components. I believe, that is, that this relation is in fact an ‘ambivalent’ one, composed of conﬂicting
aﬀectionate and hostile impulses.
Some of those impulses are obvious enough. On the side of
the mother-in-law there is reluctance to give up the possession
of her daughter, distrust of the stranger to whom she is to be
handed over, an impulse to retain the dominating position
which she has occupied in her own house. On the man’s side
there is a determination not to submit any longer to someone
else’s will, jealousy of anyone who possessed his wife’s aﬀection
before he did, and, last but not least, an unwillingness to allow
anything to interfere with the illusory over-valuation bred of his
sexual feelings. The ﬁgure of his mother-in-law usually causes
such an interference, for she has many features which remind
him of her daughter and yet lacks all the charms of youth,
beauty and spiritual freshness which endear his wife to him.
But we are able to bring forward other motives than these,
thanks to the knowledge of concealed mental impulses which
we have acquired from the psycho-analytic examination of individual human beings. A woman whose psycho-sexual needs
should ﬁnd satisfaction in her marriage and her family life is
often threatened with the danger of being left unsatisﬁed,
because her marriage relation has come to a premature end and
because of the uneventfulness of her emotional life. A mother, as

17

18

totem and taboo

she grows older, saves herself from this by putting herself in her
children’s place, by identifying herself with them; and this she
does by making their emotional experiences her own. Parents
are said to stay young with their children, and that is indeed one
of the most precious psychological gains that parents derive
from their children. Where a marriage is childless, the wife has
lost one of the things which might be of most help to her in
tolerating the resignation that her own marriage demands from
her. A mother’s sympathetic identiﬁcation with her daughter can
easily go so far that she herself falls in love with the man her
daughter loves; and in glaring instances this may lead to severe
forms of neurotic illness as a result of her violent mental
struggles against this emotional situation. In any case, it very
frequently happens that a mother-in-law is subject to an impulse
to fall in love in this way, and this impulse itself or an opposing
trend are added to the tumult of conﬂicting forces in her mind.
And very often the unkind, sadistic components of her love are
directed on to her son-in-law in order that the forbidden,
aﬀectionate ones may be the more severely suppressed.
A man’s relation to his mother-in-law is complicated by similar impulses, though they have another source. It is regularly
found that he chose his mother as the object of his love, and
perhaps his sister as well, before passing on to his ﬁnal choice.
Because of the barrier that exists against incest, his love is
deﬂected from the two ﬁgures on whom his aﬀection was
centred in his childhood on to an outside object that is modelled
upon them. The place of his own and his sister’s mother is taken
by his mother-in-law. He has an impulse to fall back upon his
original choice, though everything in him ﬁghts against it. His
horror of incest insists that the genealogical history of his choice
of an object for his love shall not be recalled. His repudiation of
this impulse is also facilitated by the fact that his mother-in-law
is only a contemporary ﬁgure; he has not known her all his life,
so that there is no unchangeable picture of her preserved in his

the horror of incest

unconscious. A streak of irritability and malevolence that is apt
to be present in the medley of his feelings leads us to suspect that
she does in fact oﬀer him a temptation to incest; and this is
conﬁrmed by the not uncommon event of a man openly falling
in love with the woman who is later to be his mother-in-law
before transferring his love to her daughter.
I can see nothing against the presumption that it is precisely
this incestuous factor in the relation that provides savages with
the motive for their rules of avoidance between son-in-law and
mother-in-law. Thus the explanation which we should adopt for
these strictly enforced avoidances among primitive peoples is
that put forward by Fison [see p. 13], which regards them
merely as a further protection against possible incest. The same
explanation holds good of all other avoidances, between both
blood and tribal relations. The only diﬀerence would be that in
the case of blood relations the possibility of incest is an immediate one and the intention to prevent it may be conscious; in the
other cases, including that of a man’s relation to his mother-inlaw, the possibility of incest would seem to be a temptation in
phantasy set in motion through the agency of unconscious
connecting links.
There has been little opportunity in the preceding pages for
showing how new light can be thrown upon the facts of social
psychology by the adoption of a psycho-analytic method of
approach: for the horror of incest displayed by savages has long
been recognized as such and stands in need of no further interpretation. All that I have been able to add to our understanding
of it is to emphasize the fact that it is essentially an infantile feature
and that it reveals a striking agreement with the mental life of
neurotic patients. Psycho-analysis has taught us that a boy’s
earliest choice of objects for his love is incestuous and that those
objects are forbidden ones—his mother and his sister. We have
learnt, too, the manner in which, as he grows up, he liberates

19

20

totem and taboo

himself from this incestuous attraction. A neurotic, on the other
hand, invariably exhibits some degree of psychical infantilism.
He has either failed to get free from the psycho-sexual conditions that prevailed in his childhood or he has returned to
them—two possibilities which may be summed up as developmental inhibition and regression. Thus incestuous ﬁxations of
libido continue to play (or begin once more to play) the principal part in his unconscious mental life. We have arrived at the
point of regarding a child’s relation to his parents, dominated as
it is by incestuous longings, as the nuclear complex of neurosis.
This revelation of the importance of incest in neurosis is naturally received with universal scepticism by adults and normal
people. Similar expressions of disbelief, for instance, inevitably
greet the writings of Otto Rank [e.g. 1907 and 1912], which
have brought more and more evidence to show the extent to
which the interest of creative writers centres round the theme of
incest and how the same theme, in countless variations and distortions, provides the subject-matter of poetry. We are driven to
believe that this rejection is principally a product of the distaste
which human beings feel for their early incestuous wishes, now
overtaken by repression. It is therefore of no small importance
that we are able to show that these same incestuous wishes,
which are later destined to become unconscious, are still
regarded by savage peoples as immediate perils against which
the most severe measures of defence must be enforced.

2
TABOO AND EMOTIONAL
AMBIVALENCE
(1)
‘Taboo’ is a Polynesian word. It is diﬃcult for us to ﬁnd a translation for it, since the concept connoted by it is one which we no
longer possess. It was still current among the ancient Romans,
whose ‘sacer’ was the same as the Polynesian ‘taboo’. So, too, the
‘αγο’ of the Greeks and the ‘kadesh’ of the Hebrews must have
had the same meaning as is expressed in ‘taboo’ by the Polynesians and in analogous terms by many other races in America,
Africa (Madagascar) and North and Central Asia.
The meaning of ‘taboo’, as we see it, diverges in two contrary directions. To us it means, on the one hand, ‘sacred’,
‘consecrated’, and on the other ‘uncanny’, ‘dangerous’, ‘forbidden’, ‘unclean’. The converse of ‘taboo’ in Polynesian is
‘noa’, which means ‘common’ or ‘generally accessible’. Thus
‘taboo’ has about it a sense of something unapproachable, and
it is principally expressed in prohibitions and restrictions. Our

22

totem and taboo

collocation ‘holy dread’ would often coincide in meaning with
‘taboo’.
Taboo restrictions are distinct from religious or moral prohibitions. They are not based upon any divine ordinance, but
may be said to impose themselves on their own account. They
diﬀer from moral prohibitions in that they fall into no system
that declares quite generally that certain abstinences must be
observed and gives reasons for that necessity. Taboo prohibitions
have no grounds and are of unknown origin. Though they are
unintelligible to us, to those who are dominated by them they
are taken as a matter of course.
Wundt (1906, 308) describes taboo as the oldest human
unwritten code of laws. It is generally supposed that taboo is
older than gods and dates back to a period before any kind of
religion existed.
Since we need an impartial account of taboo to submit to
psycho-analytic examination, I shall now give some extracts and
summaries of portions of the article ‘Taboo’ in the Encyclopaedia
Britannica (1910–11),1 the author of which was Northcote W.
Thomas, the anthropologist.
‘Properly speaking taboo includes only (a) the sacred (or
unclean) character of person or things, (b) the kind of prohibition which results from this character, and (c) the sanctity (or
uncleanness) which results from a violation of the prohibition.
The converse of taboo in Polynesia is noa and allied forms, which
mean “general” or “common”. . . .
‘Various classes of taboo in the wider sense may be distinguished: (i) natural or direct, the result of mana (mysterious
power) inherent in a person or thing; (ii) communicated or
indirect, equally the result of mana, but (a) acquired or (b)
imposed by a priest, chief or other person; (iii) intermediate,
1

This includes a bibliography of the chief literature on the subject.

taboo and emotional ambivalence

where both factors are present, as in the appropriation of a
wife to her husband. . . .’ The term is also applied to other
ritual restrictions, but what is better described as a ‘religious
interdiction’ should not be referred to as taboo.
‘The objects of taboo are many: (i) direct taboos aim at (a)
the protection of important persons—chiefs, priests, etc.—and
things against harm; (b) the safeguarding of the weak—
women, children and common people generally—from the
powerful mana (magical inﬂuence) of chiefs and priests; (c) the
provision against the dangers incurred by handling or coming
in contact with corpses, by eating certain foods, etc.; (d) the
guarding the chief acts of life—birth, initiation, marriage and
sexual functions, etc., against interference; (e) the securing of
human beings against the wrath or power of gods and spirits;1
(f) the securing of unborn infants and young children, who
stand in a specially sympathetic relation with one or both parents, from the consequences of certain actions, and more especially from the communication of qualities supposed to be
derived from certain foods. (ii) Taboos are imposed in order to
secure against thieves the property of an individual, his ﬁelds,
tools, etc. . . .’
The punishment for the violation of a taboo was no doubt
originally left to an internal, automatic agency: the violated
taboo itself took vengeance. When, at a later stage, ideas of gods
and spirits arose, with whom taboo became associated, the penalty was expected to follow automatically from the divine power.
In other cases, probably as a result of a further evolution of the
concept, society itself took over the punishment of oﬀenders,
whose conduct had brought their fellows into danger. Thus the
earliest human penal systems may be traced back to taboo.
‘The violation of a taboo makes the oﬀender himself
1

In the present context this use of the term ‘taboo’ may be disregarded as not
being a primary one.

23

24

totem and taboo

taboo. . . .’ Certain of the dangers brought into existence by the
violation may be averted by acts of atonement and puriﬁcation.
The source of taboo is attributed to a peculiar magical power
which is inherent in persons and spirits and can be conveyed by
them through the medium of inanimate objects. ‘Persons or
things which are regarded as taboo may be compared to objects
charged with electricity; they are the seat of a tremendous power
which is transmissible by contact, and may be liberated with
destructive eﬀect if the organisms which provoke its discharge
are too weak to resist it; the result of a violation of a taboo
depends partly on the strength of the magical inﬂuence inherent
in the taboo object or person, partly on the strength of the
opposing mana of the violator of the taboo. Thus, kings and
chiefs are possessed of great power, and it is death for their
subjects to address them directly; but a minister or other person
of greater mana than common can approach them unharmed,
and can in turn be approached by their inferiors without
risk. . . . So too indirect taboos depend for their strength on the
mana of him who imposes them; if it is a chief or a priest, they
are more powerful than those imposed by a common
person. . . .’
It is no doubt the transmissibility of taboo which accounts for
the attempts to throw it oﬀ by suitable puriﬁcatory ceremonies.
Taboos may be permanent or temporary. Among the former
are those attaching to priests and chiefs, as well as to dead persons and anything belonging to them. Temporary taboos may be
attached to certain particular states, such as menstruation and
child-birth, to warriors before and after an expedition, or to
special activities such as ﬁshing and hunting. A general taboo
may (like a Papal Interdict) be imposed upon a whole region and
may then last for many years.
If I judge my readers’ feelings aright, I think it is safe to say that
in spite of all that they have now heard about taboo they still have

taboo and emotional ambivalence

very little idea of the meaning of the term or of what place to
give it in their thoughts. This is no doubt due to the insuﬃciency
of the information I have given them and to my having omitted
to discuss the relation between taboo and superstition, the belief
in spirits, and religion. On the other hand, I am afraid a more
detailed account of what is known about taboo would have been
even more confusing, and I can assure them that in fact the
whole subject is highly obscure.
What we are concerned with, then, is a number of prohibitions to which these primitive races are subjected. Every sort of
thing is forbidden; but they have no idea why, and it does not
occur to them to raise the question. On the contrary, they submit
to the prohibitions as though they were a matter of course and
feel convinced that any violation of them will be automatically
met by the direst punishment. We have trustworthy stories of
how any unwitting violation of one of these prohibitions is in
fact automatically punished. An innocent wrong-doer, who may,
for instance, have eaten a forbidden animal, falls into a deep
depression, anticipates death and then dies in bitter earnest.
These prohibitions are mainly directed against liberty of enjoyment and against freedom of movement and communication. In
some cases they have an intelligible meaning and are clearly
aimed at abstinences and renunciations. But in other cases their
subject-matter is quite incomprehensible; they are concerned
with trivial details and seem to be of a purely ceremonial nature.
Behind all these prohibitions there seems to be something in
the nature of a theory that they are necessary because certain
persons and things are charged with a dangerous power, which
can be transferred through contact with them, almost like an
infection. The quantity of this dangerous attribute also plays a
part. Some people or things have more of it than others and the
danger is actually proportional to the diﬀerence of potential of
the charges. The strangest fact seems to be that anyone who
has transgressed one of these prohibitions himself acquires the

25

26

totem and taboo

characteristic of being prohibited—as though the whole of the
dangerous charge had been transferred over to him. This power
is attached to all special individuals, such as kings, priests or newborn babies, to all exceptional states, such as the physical states of
menstruation, puberty or birth, and to all uncanny things, such as
sickness and death and what is associated with them through
their power of infection or contagion.
The word ‘taboo’ denotes everything, whether a person or a
place or a thing or a transitory condition, which is the vehicle or
source of this mysterious attribute. It also denotes the prohibitions arising from the same attribute. And, ﬁnally, it has a connotation which includes alike ‘sacred’ and ‘above the ordinary’,
as well as ‘dangerous’, ‘unclean’ and ‘uncanny’.
This word and the system denoted by it give expression to a
group of mental attitudes and ideas which seem remote indeed
from our understanding. In particular, there would seem to be
no possibility of our coming into closer contact with them
without examining the belief in ghosts and spirits which is
characteristic of these low levels of culture.
Why, it may be asked at this point, should we concern ourselves at all with this riddle of taboo? Not only, I think, because it
is worth while trying to solve any psychological problem for its
own sake, but for other reasons as well. It may begin to dawn on
us that the taboos of the savage Polynesians are after all not so
remote from us as we were inclined to think at ﬁrst, that the
moral and conventional prohibitions by which we ourselves are
governed may have some essential relationship with these primitive taboos and that an explanation of taboo might throw a light
upon the obscure origin of our own ‘categorical imperative’.
Accordingly, we shall be particularly interested to hear the views
of so notable an investigator as Wilhelm Wundt on the subject of
taboo, especially as he promises ‘to trace back the concept of
taboo to its earliest roots’ (1906, 301).

taboo and emotional ambivalence

Wundt writes of that concept that ‘it comprises all of the
usages in which is expressed a dread of certain objects related to
cult ideas or of actions connected with them’. (Ibid., 237.) And,
in another passage: ‘If we understand by it [taboo], in accordance with the general meaning of the word, every prohibition
(whether laid down in usage or custom or in explicitly formulated laws) against touching an object or making use of it
for one’s own purposes or against using certain proscribed
words . . .’ then, he goes on, there can be no race and no level of
culture which has escaped the ill-eﬀects of taboo. [Ibid., 301.]
Wundt next proceeds to explain why it seems to him advisable to study the nature of taboo in the primitive conditions of
the Australian savages rather than in the higher culture of the
Polynesian peoples. [Ibid., 302.] He divides the taboo prohibitions among the Australians into three classes, according as they
aﬀect animals, human beings or other objects. The taboos on
animals, which consist essentially of prohibitions against killing
and eating them, constitute the nucleus of Totemism. [Ibid., 303.]1
The second class of taboos, those directed towards human
beings, are of an entirely diﬀerent kind. They are restricted in the
ﬁrst instance to circumstances in which the person on whom the
taboo is imposed ﬁnds himself in an unusual situation. Thus
young men are taboo at their initiation ceremonies, women are
taboo during menstruation and immediately after giving birth;
so too new-born babies, sick persons and, above all, the dead are
taboo. A man’s property which is in his constant use is permanently taboo to all other men: his clothing, for instance, his tools
and weapons. Included in a man’s most personal property, in
Australia, is the new name which he received when he was a boy
at his initiation. It is taboo and must be kept secret. The third
class of taboos, which are imposed on trees, plants, houses and
localities, are less stable. They appear to follow a rule that
1

Cf. the ﬁrst and fourth essays in this volume.

27

28

totem and taboo

anything that is uncanny or provokes dread for any reason
becomes subject to taboo. [Ibid., 304.]
The modiﬁcations shown by taboo in the richer culture of
Polynesia and the Malay Archipelago are, as Wundt himself is
obliged to admit, not very profound. The more marked social
diﬀerences among these peoples ﬁnd expression in the fact that
chiefs, kings and priests exercise a specially eﬀective taboo and
are themselves subject to a taboo of the greatest force. [Ibid.,
305–6.]
But, adds Wundt, the true sources of taboo lie deeper than in
the interests of the privileged classes: ‘they have their origin in
the source of the most primitive and at the same time most
lasting of human instincts—in fear of “demonic” powers.’
(Ibid., 307.) ‘Taboo is originally nothing other than the objectiﬁed fear of the “demonic” power which is believed to lie hidden
in a tabooed object. The taboo prohibits anything that may provoke that power and commands that, if it has been injured,
whether wittingly or unwittingly, the demon’s vengeance must
be averted.’ [Ibid., 308.]
Little by little, we are told, taboo then grows into a force with
a basis of its own, independent of the belief in demons. It
develops into the rule of custom and tradition and ﬁnally of law.
‘But the unspoken command underlying all the prohibitions of
taboo, with their numberless variations according to the time
and place, is originally one and one only: “Beware of the wrath
of demons!” ’ [Loc. cit.]
Wundt informs us, then, that taboo is an expression and
derivative of the belief of primitive peoples in ‘demonic’ power.
Later, he tells us, it freed itself from this root and remained a
power simply because it was a power—from a kind of mental
conservatism. And thereafter it itself became the root of our
moral precepts and of our laws. Though the ﬁrst of these assertions may provoke little contradiction, I believe I shall be
expressing the thoughts of many readers when I say that

taboo and emotional ambivalence

Wundt’s explanation comes as something of a disappointment.
This is surely not tracing back the concept of taboo to its sources
or revealing its earliest roots. Neither fear nor demons can be
regarded by psychology as ‘earliest’ things, impervious to any
attempt at discovering their antecedents. It would be another
matter if demons really existed. But we know that, like gods,
they are creations of the human mind: they were made by something and out of something.
Wundt has important views on the double signiﬁcance of
taboo, though these are not very clearly expressed. According to
him, the distinction between ‘sacred’ and ‘unclean’ did not exist
in the primitive beginnings of taboo. For that very reason those
concepts were at that stage without the peculiar signiﬁcance
which they could only acquire when they became opposed to
each other. Animals, human beings or localities on which a
taboo was imposed were ‘demonic’, not ‘sacred’, nor, therefore,
in the sense which was later acquired, ‘unclean’. It is precisely
this neutral and intermediate meaning—‘demonic’ or ‘what
may not be touched’—that is appropriately expressed by the
word ‘taboo’, since it stresses a characteristic which remains
common for all time both to what is sacred and to what is
unclean: the dread of contact with it. The persistence, however,
of this important common characteristic is at the same time
evidence that the ground covered by the two was originally one
and that it was only as a result of further inﬂuences that it
became diﬀerentiated and eventually developed into opposites.
[Ibid., 309.]
According to Wundt, this original characteristic of taboo—
the belief in a ‘demonic’ power which lies hidden in an object
and which, if the object is touched or used unlawfully, takes its
vengeance by casting a spell over the wrong-doer—is still
wholly and solely ‘objectiﬁed fear’. That fear has not yet split up
into the two forms into which it later develops: veneration and
horror. [Ibid., 310.]

29

30

totem and taboo

But how did this split take place? Through the transplanting,
so Wundt tells us, of the taboo ordinances from the sphere of
demons into the sphere of belief in gods. [Ibid., 311.] The contrast between ‘sacred’ and ‘unclean’ coincides with a succession
of two stages of mythology. The earlier of these stages did not
completely disappear when the second one was reached but
persisted in what was regarded as an inferior and eventually a
contemptible form. [Ibid., 312.] It is, he says, a general law of
mythology that a stage which has been passed, for the very
reason that it has been overcome and driven under by a superior
stage, persists in an inferior form alongside the later one, so that
the objects of its veneration turn into objects of horror. [Ibid.,
313.]
The remainder of Wundt’s discussion deals with the relation
of the concept of taboo to puriﬁcation and sacriﬁce.

(2)
Anyone approaching the problem of taboo from the angle of
psycho-analysis, that is to say, of the investigation of the
unconscious portion of the individual mind, will recognize,
after a moment’s reﬂection, that these phenomena are far from
unfamiliar to him. He has come across people who have created
for themselves individual taboo prohibitions of this very kind
and who obey them just as strictly as savages obey the communal
taboos of their tribe or society. If he were not already accustomed to describing such people as ‘obsessional’ patients, he
would ﬁnd ‘taboo sickness’ a most appropriate name for their
condition. Having learnt so much, however, about this obsessional sickness from psycho-analytic examination—its clinical
ætiology and the essence of its psychical mechanism—he can
scarcely refrain from applying the knowledge he has thus
acquired to the parallel sociological phenomenon.
A warning must be uttered at this point. The similarity

taboo and emotional ambivalence

between taboo and obsessional sickness may be no more than a
matter of externals; it may apply only to the forms in which they
are manifested and not extend to their essential character. Nature
delights in making use of the same forms in the most various
biological connections: as it does, for instance, in the appearance
of branch-like structures both in coral and in plants, and indeed
in some forms of crystal and in certain chemical precipitates. It
would obviously be hasty and unproﬁtable to infer the existence
of any internal relationship from such points of agreement as
these, which merely derive from the operation of the same
mechanical causes. We shall bear this warning in mind, but we
need not be deterred by it from proceeding with our
comparison.
The most obvious and striking point of agreement between
the obsessional prohibitions of neurotics and taboos is that these
prohibitions are equally lacking in motive and equally puzzling
in their origin. Having made their appearance at some unspeciﬁed moment, they are forcibly maintained by an irresistible fear.
No external threat of punishment is required, for there is an
internal certainty, a moral conviction, that any violation will lead
to intolerable disaster. The most that an obsessional patient can
say on this point is that he has an undeﬁned feeling that some
particular person in his environment will be injured as a result of
the violation. Nothing is known of the nature of the injury; and
indeed even this wretchedly small amount of information is
more often obtained in connection with the expiatory and
defensive actions which we shall have to discuss later than with
the prohibitions themselves.
As in the case of taboo, the principal prohibition, the nucleus
of the neurosis, is against touching; and thence it is sometimes
known as ‘touching phobia’ or ‘délire du toucher’. The prohibition
does not merely apply to immediate physical contact but has an
extent as wide as the metaphorical use of the phrase ‘to come in

31

32

totem and taboo

contact with’. Anything that directs the patient’s thoughts to the
forbidden object, anything that brings him into intellectual contact with it, is just as much prohibited as direct physical contact.
This same extension also occurs in the case of taboo.
The purpose of some of the prohibitions is immediately obvious. Others, on the contrary, strike us as incomprehensible,
senseless and silly, and prohibitions of this latter sort are
described as ‘ceremonial’. This distinction, too, is found in the
observances of taboo. [See p. 21.]
Obsessional prohibitions are extremely liable to displacement.
They extend from one object to another along whatever paths
the context may provide, and this new object then becomes, to
use the apt expression of one of my women patients,
‘impossible’—till at last the whole world lies under an embargo
of ‘impossibility’. Obsessional patients behave as though the
‘impossible’ persons and things were carriers of a dangerous
infection liable to be spread by contact on to everything in their
neighbourhood. I have already [p. 21] drawn attention to the
same characteristic capacity for contagion and transference in
my description of taboo. We know, too, that anyone who violates
a taboo by coming into contact with something that is taboo
becomes taboo himself and that then no one may come into
contact with him.
I will now put side by side two instances of the transference
(or, as it is better to say, the displacement) of a prohibition. One
of these is taken from the life of the Maoris and the other
from an observation of my own on a female obsessional
patient.
‘A Maori chief would not blow a ﬁre with his mouth; for his
sacred breath would communicate its sanctity to the ﬁre, which
would pass it on to the pot on the ﬁre, which would pass it on to
the meat in the pot, which would pass it on to the man who ate
the meat, which was in the pot, which stood on the ﬁre, which
was breathed on by the chief, so that the eater, infected by the

taboo and emotional ambivalence

chief ’s breath conveyed through these intermediaries, would
surely die.’1
My patient’s husband purchased a household article of some
kind and brought it home with him. She insisted that it should
be removed or it would make the room she lived in ‘impossible’.
For she had heard that the article had been bought in a shop
situated in, let us say, ‘Smith’ Street.2 ‘Smith’, however, was the
married name of a woman friend of hers who lived in a distant
town and whom she had known in her youth under her maiden
name. This friend of hers was at the moment ‘impossible’ or
taboo. Consequently the article that had been purchased here in
Vienna was as taboo as the friend herself with whom she must
not come into contact.
Obsessional prohibitions involve just as extensive renunciations and restrictions in the lives of those who are subject to
them as do taboo prohibitions; but some of them can be lifted if
certain actions are performed. Thereafter, these actions must be
performed: they become compulsive or obsessive acts, and there
can be no doubt that they are in the nature of expiation,
penance, defensive measures and puriﬁcation. The commonest
of these obsessive acts is washing in water (‘washing mania’).
Some taboo prohibitions can be replaced in just the same way; or
rather their violation can be made good by a similar ‘ceremonial’; and here again lustration with water is the preferred
method.
Let us now summarize the points in which agreement
between taboo usages and obsessional symptoms is most clearly
shown: (1) the fact that the prohibitions lack any assignable
motive; (2) the fact that they are maintained by an internal
necessity; (3) the fact that they are easily displaceable and that
there is a risk of infection from the prohibited object; and (4)
1
2

Frazer (1911b, 136) [quoting Taylor (1870, 165)].
[‘Hirschengasse’ and ‘Hirsch’ in the original.]

33

34

totem and taboo

the fact that they give rise to injunctions for the performance of
ceremonial acts.
Now both the clinical history and the psychical mechanism of
obsessional neurosis have become known to us through psychoanalysis. The clinical history of a typical case of ‘touching phobia’ is as follows. Quite at the beginning, in very early childhood,
the patient shows a strong desire to touch, the aim of which is of a
far more specialized kind than one would have been inclined to
expect. This desire is promptly met by an external prohibition
against carrying out that particular kind of touching.1 The prohibition is accepted, since it ﬁnds support from powerful internal
forces,2 and proves stronger than the instinct which is seeking to
express itself in the touching. In consequence, however, of the
child’s primitive psychical constitution, the prohibition does not
succeed in abolishing the instinct. Its only result is to repress the
instinct (the desire to touch) and banish it into the unconscious.
Both the prohibition and the instinct persist: the instinct because
it has only been repressed and not abolished, and the prohibition
because, if it ceased, the instinct would force its way through
into consciousness and into actual operation. A situation is created which remains undealt with—a psychical ﬁxation—and
everything else follows from the continuing conﬂict between the
prohibition and the instinct.
The principal characteristic of the psychological constellation
which becomes ﬁxed in this way is what might be described as
the subject’s ambivalent3 attitude towards a single object, or rather
towards one act in connection with that object. He is constantly
wishing to perform this act (the touching), [and looks on it as
1

Both the desire and the prohibition relate to the child’s touching his own
genitals.
2
That is, from the child’s loving relation to the authors of the prohibition.
3
To borrow the apt term coined by Bleuler.

taboo and emotional ambivalence

his supreme enjoyment, but he must not perform it] and detests
it as well.1 The conﬂict between these two currents cannot be
promptly settled because—there is no other way of putting it—
they are localized in the subject’s mind in such a manner that
they cannot come up against each other. The prohibition is noisily conscious, while the persistent desire to touch is unconscious
and the subject knows nothing of it. If it were not for this psychological factor, an ambivalence like this could neither last so
long nor lead to such consequences.
In our clinical history of a case we have insisted that the
imposition of the prohibition in very early childhood is the
determining point; a similar importance attaches in the subsequent developments to the mechanism of repression at the
same early age. As a result of the repression which has been
enforced and which involves a loss of memory—an amnesia—
the motives for the prohibition (which is conscious) remain
unknown; and all attempts at disposing of it by intellectual processess must fail, since they cannot ﬁnd any base of attack. The
prohibition owes its strength and its obsessive character precisely to its unconscious opponent, the concealed and
undiminished desire—that is to say, to an internal necessity
inaccessible to conscious inspection. The ease with which the
prohibition can be transferred and extended reﬂects a process
which falls in with the unconscious desire and is greatly facilitated by the psychological conditions that prevail in the
unconscious. The instinctual desire is constantly shifting in
order to escape from the impasse and endeavours to ﬁnd
substitutes—substitute objects and substitute acts—in place of
the prohibited ones. In consequence of this, the prohibition
itself shifts about as well, and extends to any new aims which
the forbidden impulse may adopt. Any fresh advance made by
1

[From the Second Edition (1920) onwards, the words in square brackets
were, perhaps accidentally, omitted.]

35

36

totem and taboo

the repressed libido is answered by a fresh sharpening of the
prohibition. The mutual inhibition of the two conﬂicting forces
produces a need for discharge, for reducing the prevailing tension; and to this may be attributed the reason for the performance
of obsessive acts. In the case of a neurosis these are clearly compromise actions: from one point of view they are evidences of
remorse, eﬀorts at expiation, and so on, while on the other hand
they are at the same time substitutive acts to compensate the
instinct for what has been prohibited. It is a law of neurotic
illness that these obsessive acts fall more and more under the
sway of the instinct and approach nearer and nearer to the
activity which was originally prohibited.
Let us now make the experiment of treating taboo as though it
were of the same nature as an obsessional prohibition in one of
our patients. We must make it clear beforehand, however, that
many of the taboo prohibitions that come under our notice are
of a secondary, displaced and distorted kind, and that we shall
have to be satisﬁed if we can throw only a little light on the most
fundamental and signiﬁcant taboos. Moreover, the diﬀerences
between the situation of a savage and of a neurotic are no doubt
of suﬃcient importance to make any exact agreement impossible
and to prevent our carrying the comparison to the point of
identity in every detail.
In the ﬁrst place, then, it must be said that there is no sense in
asking savages to tell us the real reason for their prohibitions—
the origin of taboo. It follows from our postulates that they
cannot answer, since their real reason must be ‘unconscious’. We
can, however, reconstruct the history of taboo as follows on the
model of obsessional prohibitions. Taboos, we must suppose, are
prohibitions of primæval antiquity which were at some time
externally imposed upon a generation of primitive men; they
must, that is to say, no doubt have been impressed on them
violently by the previous generation. These prohibitions must

taboo and emotional ambivalence

have concerned activities towards which there was a strong
inclination. They must then have persisted from generation to
generation, perhaps merely as a result of tradition transmitted
through parental and social authority. Possibly, however, in later
generations they may have become ‘organized’ as an inherited
psychical endowment. Who can decide whether such things as
‘innate ideas’ exist, or whether in the present instance they have
operated, either alone or in conjunction with education, to
bring about the permanent ﬁxing of taboos? But one thing
would certainly follow from the persistence of the taboo, namely
that the original desire to do the prohibited thing must also still
persist among the tribes concerned. They must therefore have an
ambivalent attitude towards their taboos. In their unconscious
there is nothing they would like more than to violate them, but
they are afraid to do so; they are afraid precisely because they
would like to, and the fear is stronger than the desire. The desire
is unconscious, however, in every individual member of the
tribe just as it is in neurotics.
The most ancient and important taboo prohibitions are the
two basic laws of totemism: not to kill the totem animal and to
avoid sexual intercourse with members of the totem clan of the
opposite sex.
These, then, must be the oldest and most powerful of human
desires. We cannot hope to understand this or test our hypothesis on these two examples, so long as we are totally ignorant of
the meaning and origin of the totemic system. But the wording
of these two taboos and the fact of their concurrence will remind
anyone acquainted with the ﬁndings of psycho-analytic investigations on individuals of something quite deﬁnite, which
psycho-analysts regard as the centre-point of childhood wishes
and as the nucleus of neuroses.1
1

Cf. my forthcoming study upon totemism, to which I have referred more
than once in these pages (the fourth essay in this volume).

37

38

totem and taboo

The multiplicity of the manifestations of taboo, which have
led to the attempts at classiﬁcation that I have already mentioned,
are reduced to a single unity by our thesis: the basis of taboo is a
prohibited action, for performing which a strong inclination
exists in the unconscious.
We have heard [see p. 22], though without understanding it,
that anyone who does what is forbidden, that is, who violates a
taboo, becomes taboo himself. How is this to be brought into
line with the fact that taboo attaches not only to a person who
has done what is forbidden but also to persons in particular
states, to the states themselves, as well as to impersonal objects?
What can the dangerous attribute be which remains the same
under all these diﬀerent conditions? There is only one thing it
can be: the quality of exciting men’s ambivalence and tempting
them to transgress the prohibition.
Anyone who has violated a taboo becomes taboo himself
because he possesses the dangerous quality of tempting others to
follow his example: why should he be allowed to do what is
forbidden to others? Thus he is truly contagious in that every
example encourages imitation, and for that reason he himself
must be shunned.
But a person who has not violated any taboo may yet be
permanently or temporarily taboo because he is in a state which
possesses the quality of arousing forbidden desires in others and
of awakening a conﬂict of ambivalence in them. The majority of
exceptional positions and exceptional states [see p. 22] are of this
kind and possess this dangerous power. The king or chief arouses
envy on account of his privileges: everyone, perhaps, would like
to be a king. Dead men, new-born babies and women menstruating or in labour stimulate desires by their special helplessness; a
man who has just reached maturity stimulates them by the
promise of new enjoyment. For that reason all of these persons
and all of these states are taboo, since temptation must be
resisted.

taboo and emotional ambivalence

Now, too, we can understand why the amounts of mana possessed by diﬀerent persons can be subtracted from one another
and can to some extent cancel one another out [see p. 20]. A
king’s taboo is too strong for one of his subjects because the
social diﬀerence between them is too great. But a minister may
without any harm serve as an intermediary between them. If we
translate this from the language of taboo into that of normal
psychology, it means something like this. A subject, who dreads
the great temptation presented to him by contact with the king,
can perhaps tolerate dealings with an oﬃcial whom he does not
need to envy so much and whose position may even seem attainable to him. A minister, again, can mitigate his envy of the king
by reﬂecting on the power which he himself wields. So it comes
about that smaller diﬀerences between the amounts of the
tempting magical force possessed by two people are less to be
feared than greater ones.
It is equally clear why it is that the violation of certain taboo
prohibitions constitutes a social danger which must be punished
or atoned for by all the members of the community if they are
not all to suﬀer injury [see p. 20]. If we replace the unconscious
desires by conscious impulses we shall see that the danger is a
real one. It lies in the risk of imitation, which would quickly lead
to the dissolution of the community. If the violation were not
avenged by the other members they would become aware that
they wanted to act in the same way as the transgressor.
We cannot be surprised at the fact that, in the restrictions of
taboo, touching plays a part similar to the one which it plays in
‘touching phobias’, though the secret meaning of the prohibition cannot be of such a specialized nature in taboo as it is in the
neurosis. Touching is the ﬁrst step towards obtaining any sort of
control over, or attempting to make use of, a person or object.
We have translated the contagious power inherent in taboo
into the possession of some attribute likely to produce temptation or encourage imitation. This does not appear to tally with

39

40

totem and taboo

the fact that the contagious character of taboo is shown chieﬂy
by its transmissibility on to material objects, which then
themselves become carriers of taboo.
This transmissibility of taboo is a reﬂection of the tendency,
on which we have already remarked, for the unconscious
instinct in the neurosis to shift constantly along associative paths
on to new objects. Our attention is thus directed to the fact that
the dangerous magical force of mana corresponds to two powers
of a more realistic sort: the power of reminding a man of his
own prohibited wishes and the apparently more important one
of inducing him to transgress the prohibition in obedience to
those wishes. These two functions can be reduced to one, however, if we suppose that in a primitive mind the awakening of the
memory of a forbidden action is naturally linked with the
awakening of an impulse to put that action into eﬀect. Thus
recollection and temptation come together again. It must be
admitted, too, that, in so far as the example of a man transgressing a prohibition tempts another man to do the same, disobedience to prohibitions spreads like a contagion, in just the same
way as a taboo is transferred from a person to a material object
and from one material object to another.
If the violation of a taboo can be made good by atonement or
expiation, which involve the renunciation of some possession or
some freedom, this proves that obedience to the taboo injunction meant in itself the renunciation of something desirable.
Emancipation from one renunciation is made up for by the
imposition of another one elsewhere. This leads us to conclude
that atonement is a more fundamental factor than puriﬁcation in
the ceremonials of taboo.
I will now sum up the respects in which light has been thrown
on the nature of taboo by comparing it with the obsessional
prohibitions of neurotics. Taboo is a primæval prohibition forcibly imposed (by some authority) from outside, and directed

taboo and emotional ambivalence

against the most powerful longings to which human beings are
subject. The desire to violate it persists in their unconscious;
those who obey the taboo have an ambivalent attitude to what
the taboo prohibits. The magical power that is attributed to
taboo is based on the capacity for arousing temptation; and it
acts like a contagion because examples are contagious and
because the prohibited desire in the unconscious shifts from one
thing to another. The fact that the violation of a taboo can be
atoned for by a renunciation shows that renunciation lies at the
basis of obedience to taboo.

(3)
What we now want to discover is how much value is to be
attributed to the parallel we have drawn between taboo and
obsessional neurosis and to the view of taboo which we have
based on that parallel. Their value must clearly depend on
whether the view we have put forward has any advantages over
others, and whether it gives us a clearer understanding of taboo
than we could otherwise reach. We may be inclined to feel that
we have given suﬃcient evidence of the applicability of our
view in what has already been said; yet we must attempt to
strengthen the evidence by entering into our explanation of
taboo prohibitions and usages in greater detail.
There is also another path open to us. We can start an inquiry
as to whether some of the hypotheses which we have carried
over from neuroses to taboo or some of the results to which that
procedure has led us may not be directly veriﬁable in the phenomena of taboo. But we must decide what we are to look for.
Our assertion that taboo originated in a primæval prohibition
imposed at one time or other by some external authority is
obviously incapable of demonstration. What we shall rather
endeavour to conﬁrm, therefore, are the psychological
determinants of taboo, which we have learnt to know from

41

42

totem and taboo

obsessional neurosis. How did we arrive at our knowledge of
these psychological factors in the case of the neurosis? Through
the analytical study of its symptoms, and particularly of obsessional acts, defensive measures and obsessional commands.
We found that they showed every sign of being derived from
ambivalent impulses, either corresponding simultaneously to both
a wish and a counter-wish or operating predominantly on behalf
of one of the two opposing trends. If, now, we could succeed in
demonstrating that ambivalence, that is, the ascendancy of opposing trends, is also to be found in the observances of taboo, or if we
could point to some of them which, like obsessional acts, give
simultaneous expression to both currents, we should have established the psychological agreement between taboo and obsessional neurosis in what is perhaps their most important feature.
The two fundamental prohibitions of taboo are, as I have
already remarked, inaccessible to our analysis owing to their
connection with totemism; while certain others of its injunctions are of a secondary nature and consequently useless for our
purpose. For taboo has become the ordinary method of legislation in the communities aﬀected by it and it has come to serve
social purposes which are certainly more recent than taboo
itself: such, for instance, are the taboos imposed by chiefs and
priests for the protection of their own property and privileges.
There nevertheless remain a large group of observances on
which our investigation can be made. From these I shall select
the taboos attaching (a) to enemies, (b) to chiefs and (c) to the
dead; and I shall take the material for our examination from the
excellent collection included by Frazer in Taboo and the Perils of the
Soul (1911 b), the second part of his great work The Golden Bough.
(a) The treatment of enemies
We may be inclined to suppose that savage and half-savage races
are guilty of uninhibited and ruthless cruelty towards their

taboo and emotional ambivalence

enemies. We shall be greatly interested to learn, then, that even
in their case the killing of a man is governed by a number of
observances which are included among the usages of taboo.
These observances fall easily into four groups. They demand (1)
the appeasement of the slain enemy, (2) restrictions upon the
slayer, (3) acts of expiation and puriﬁcation by him and (4)
certain ceremonial observances. Our incomplete information on
the subject does not enable us to determine with certainty how
general or the reverse these usages may be among the peoples
concerned; but for our purposes this is a matter of indiﬀerence.
It may safely be assumed, in any case, that what we have before
us are not isolated peculiarities but widespread usages.
The rites of appeasement performed in the island of Timor, when a
warlike expedition has returned in triumph bringing the heads
of the vanquished foe, are particularly remarkable, since in addition to them the leader of the expedition is submitted to severe
restrictions (see below, p. 39). On the occasion of the expedition’s return, sacriﬁces are oﬀered to appease the souls of the
men whose heads have been taken. ‘The people think that some
misfortune would befall the victor were such oﬀerings omitted.
Moreover, a part of the ceremony consists of a dance accompanied by a song, in which the death of the slain man is lamented and his forgiveness is entreated. “Be not angry”, they say,
“because your head is here with us; had we been less lucky, our
heads might now have been exposed in your village. We have
oﬀered the sacriﬁce to appease you. Your spirit may now rest and
leave us in peace. Why were you our enemy? Would it not have
been better that we should remain friends? Then your blood
would not have been spilt and your head would not have been
cut oﬀ.” ’1 The same is true of the people of Paloo, in Celebes.
So, too, ‘the Gallas [of East Africa] returning from war sacriﬁce
1

Frazer (1911b, 166) [quoting Gramberg (1872, 216)].

43

44

totem and taboo

to the jinn or guardian spirits of their slain foes before they will
re-enter their own houses’.1
Other peoples have found a means for changing their former
enemies after their death into guardians, friends and benefactors.
This method lies in treating their severed heads with aﬀection, as
some of the savage races of Borneo boast of doing. When the Sea
Dyaks of Sarawak bring home a head from a successful headhunting expedition, for months after its arrival it is treated with
the greatest consideration and addressed with all the names of
endearment of which their language is capable. The most dainty
morsels of food are thrust into its mouth, delicacies of all kinds
and even cigars. The head is repeatedly implored to hate its
former friends and to love its new hosts since it has now become
one of them. It would be a great mistake to suppose that these
observances, which strike us as so horrible, are performed with
any intention of ridicule.2
In several of the savage tribes of North America observers have
been struck by the mourning over enemies who have been killed
and scalped. When a Choctaw had killed an enemy, he went into
mourning for a month during which he was subjected to severe
restrictions; and the Dacotas had similar practices. When the
Osages, reports a witness, have mourned over their own dead,
‘they will mourn for the foe just as if he was a friend’.3
Before considering the remaining classes of taboo usages in connection with enemies, we must deal with an obvious objection.
It will be argued against us, with Frazer and others, that the
grounds for such rites of appeasement are simple enough and
have nothing to do with any such thing as ‘ambivalence’. These
peoples are dominated by a superstitious fear of the ghosts of the
1

Frazer (loc. cit.), quoting Paulitschke (1893–6 [2, 50, 136]).
Frazer (1914, 1, 295), quoting Low (1848 [206]).
3
Frazer (1911b, 181), quoting Dorsey (1884 [126]).
2

taboo and emotional ambivalence

slain—a fear which was not unknown in classical antiquity and
which was put upon the stage by the great English dramatist in
the hallucinations of Macbeth and Richard III. All the rites of
appeasement follow logically from this superstition, as well as
the restrictions and acts of expiation which will be discussed
presently. This view is also supported by the fourth group of
these observances, which can only be explained as attempts at
driving away the ghosts of the victims that are pursuing their
murderers.1 In addition to this, the savages openly admit their
fear of the ghosts of dead enemies and themselves attribute to it
the taboo usages which we are discussing.
This objection is indeed an obvious one, and if it covered the
whole ground we could save ourselves the trouble of any further
attempt at an explanation. I shall put oﬀ dealing with it until
later, and for the moment I will merely state the alternative view
which is derived from the hypothesis based upon our earlier
discussions of taboo. The conclusion that we must draw from all
these observances is that the impulses which they express
towards an enemy are not solely hostile ones. They are also
manifestations of remorse, of admiration for the enemy, and of a
bad conscience for having killed him. It is diﬃcult to resist the
notion that, long before a table of laws was handed down by any
god, these savages were in possession of a living commandment.
‘Thou shalt not kill’, a violation of which would not go
unpunished.
Let us now return to the other three groups of taboo observances. Restrictions placed upon a victorious slayer are unusually
frequent and as a rule severe. In Timor (cf. the rites of appeasement described above, on p.37) the leader of the expedition is
forbidden ‘to return at once to his own house. A special hut is
1

Frazer (1911b, 169–74). These ceremonies consist of beating on shields,
shouting and screaming, making noises with musical instruments, etc.

45

46 totem and taboo
prepared for him, in which he has to reside for two months,
undergoing bodily and spiritual puriﬁcation. During this time
he may not go to his wife nor feed himself; the food must be put
into his mouth by another person.’1 In some Dyak tribes men
returning from a successful expedition are obliged to keep to
themselves for several days and abstain from various kinds of
food; they may not touch iron nor have any intercourse with
women. In Logea, an island in the neighbourhood of New
Guinea, ‘men who have killed or assisted in killing enemies shut
themselves up for about a week in their houses. They must avoid
all intercourse with their wives and friends, and they may not
touch food with their hands. They may eat vegetable food only,
which is brought to them cooked in special pots. The intention
of these restrictions is to guard the men against the smell of the
blood of the slain; for it is believed that if they smelt the blood
they would fall ill and die. In the Toaripi or Motumotu tribe of
south-eastern New Guinea a man who has killed another may
not go near his wife, and may not touch food with his ﬁngers.
He is fed by others, and only with certain kinds of food. These
observances last till the new moon.’ (Frazer, 1911 b, 167.)
I shall not attempt to give a complete catalogue of the instances
quoted by Frazer of restrictions imposed upon victorious
manslayers. I will only remark upon a few more such cases in
which their taboo character is particularly marked or in which
the restrictions are accompanied by expiation, puriﬁcation and
other ceremonials.
‘Among the Monumbos of German New Guinea anyone who
has slain a foe in war becomes thereby “unclean” ’—the same
term being applied to women who are menstruating or in childbed. He ‘must remain a long time in the men’s club-house,
while the villagers gather round him and celebrate his victory
1

Frazer (1911b, 166), quoting Müller (1857 [2, 252]).

taboo and emotional ambivalence

with dance and song. He may touch nobody, not even his own
wife and children; if he were to touch them it is believed that
they would be covered with sores. He becomes clean again by
washing and using other modes of puriﬁcation.’ [Ibid., 169.]
‘Among the Natchez of North America young braves who had
taken their ﬁrst scalps were obliged to observe certain rules of
abstinence for six months. They might not sleep with their wives
nor eat ﬂesh; their only food was ﬁsh and hasty-pudding. . . .
When a Choctaw had killed an enemy and taken his scalp, he
went into mourning for a month, during which he might not
comb his hair, and if his head itched he might not scratch it
except with a little stick which he wore fastened to his wrist for
the purpose.’ [Ibid., 181.]
‘When a Pima Indian had killed an Apache, he had to go
through severe ceremonies of puriﬁcation and atonement. During a sixteen-day fast he might not touch meat nor salt, nor look
on a blazing ﬁre, nor speak to a human being. He lived alone in
the woods, waited on by an old woman, who brought him his
scanty dole of food. He bathed often in the river and (as a sign of
mourning) kept his head covered with a plaster of mud. On the
seventeenth day there was a public ceremony of solemn puriﬁcation of the man and his weapons. Since the Pima Indians took the
taboo on killing much more seriously than their enemies and
did not, like them, postpone the expiation and puriﬁcation till
the end of the expedition, their warlike eﬃciency suﬀered
greatly from their moral strictness, or piety, if that term is
preferred. Despite their extreme courage, the Americans
found them unsatisfactory allies in their operations against the
Apaches.’ [Ibid., 182–4.]
However much the details and variations of the ceremonies of
expiation and puriﬁcation after the slaying of enemies might be
of interest for deeper research into the subject, I shall break oﬀ
at this point, since for our present purpose they have nothing
more to tell us. I may perhaps suggest that the temporary or

47

48

totem and taboo

permanent isolation of professional executioners, which has
persisted to the present day, may belong in this connection. The
position of the public hangman in mediæval society oﬀers a
good picture of the workings of taboo among savages.1
In the accepted explanation of all these observances of appeasement, restriction, expiation and puriﬁcation, two principles are
combined: the extension of the taboo from the slain man on to
everything that has come in contact with him and the fear of the
slain man’s ghost. How these two factors are to be combined
with each other to explain the ceremonials, whether they are to
be regarded as of equal weight, whether one is primary and the
other secondary, and if so which—none of these questions
receives an answer, and indeed it would be hard to ﬁnd one. We,
on the other hand, can lay stress on the unity of our view, which
derives all of these observances from emotional ambivalence
towards the enemy.
(b) The taboo upon rulers
The attitude of primitive peoples to their chiefs, kings and
priests is governed by two basic principles which seem to be
complementary rather than contradictory. A ruler ‘must not
only be guarded, he must also be guarded against’. (Frazer, 1911b,
132.) Both of these ends are secured by innumerable taboo
observances. We know already why it is that rulers must be
guarded against. It is because they are vehicles of the mysterious
and dangerous magical power which is transmitted by contact
like an electric charge and which brings death and ruin to anyone who is not protected by a similar charge. Any immediate or
indirect contact with this dangerous sacred entity is therefore
1

Further examples of these practices will be found in Frazer (1911b,
165–90) in the section upon ‘Manslayers tabooed’.

taboo and emotional ambivalence

avoided; and, if it cannot be avoided, some ceremonial is devised
to avert the dreaded consequences. The Nubas of East Africa, for
instance, ‘believe that they would die if they entered the house of
their priestly king; however they can evade the penalty of their
intrusion by baring the left shoulder and getting the king to lay
his hand on it.’ [Loc. cit.] Here we are met by the remarkable fact
that contact with the king is a remedy and protection against the
dangers provoked by contact with the king. No doubt, however,
there is a contrast to be drawn between the remedial power of a
touch made deliberately by the king and the danger which arises
if he is touched—a contrast between a passive and an active
relation to the king.
For examples of the healing power of the royal touch there is
no need to resort to savages. The kings of England, in times that
are not yet remote, enjoyed the power of curing scrofula, which
was known accordingly as ‘the King’s Evil’. Queen Elizabeth
exercised this royal prerogative no less than her successors.
Charles I is said to have cured a hundred patients at a stroke in
1633. But it was after the Restoration of the monarchy under his
dissolute son, Charles II, that the royal cures of scrofula reached
their climax. In the course of his reign he is reputed to have
touched close upon a hundred thousand persons. The crowd of
those in search of cure used to be so great that on one occasion
six or seven of those who came to be healed were trampled to
death. The sceptical William of Orange, who became King of
England after the dismissal of the Stuarts, refused to lend himself
to these magical practices. On the only occasion on which he
was persuaded into laying his hands on a patient, he said to him:
‘God give you better health and more sense.’ (Frazer, 1911a, 1,
368–70.)
The stories which follow are evidence of the fearful eﬀects of
active contact made, even unintentionally, with a king or anything belonging to him. ‘It once happened that a New Zealand
chief of high rank and great sanctity had left the remains of his

49

50

totem and taboo

dinner by the wayside. A slave, a stout, hungry fellow, coming up
after the chief had gone, saw the unﬁnished dinner, and ate it up
without asking questions. Hardly had he ﬁnished when he was
informed by a horror-stricken spectator that the food of which
he had eaten was the chief ’s.’ He was a strong, courageous man,
but ‘no sooner did he hear the fatal news than he was seized
with the most extraordinary convulsions and cramp in the stomach, which never ceased till he died, about sundown the same
day’.1 ‘A Maori woman having eaten of some fruit, and being
afterwards told that the fruit had been taken from a tabooed
place, exclaimed that the spirit of the chief, whose sanctity had
been thus profaned, would kill her. This was in the afternoon,
and next day by twelve o’clock she was dead.’2 ‘A Maori chief ’s
tinder-box was once the means of killing several persons; for,
having been lost by him, and found by some men who used it to
light their pipes, they died of fright on learning to whom it had
belonged.’3
It is not to be wondered at that a need was felt for isolating
such dangerous persons as chiefs and priests from the rest of the
community—to build a barrier round them which would make
them inaccessible. It may begin to dawn on us that this barrier,
originally erected for the observance of taboo, exists to this day
in the form of court ceremonial.
But perhaps the major part of this taboo upon rulers is not
derived from the need for protection against them. The second
reason for the special treatment of privileged persons—the need
to provide protection for them against the threat of danger—has
had an obvious part in creating taboos and so of giving rise to
court etiquette.
The need to protect the king from every possible form of
1

Frazer (1911b, 134–5), quoting A Pakeha Maori (1884 [96 f.]).
Frazer (loc. cit.), quoting Brown (1845 [76]).
3
Frazer (loc. cit.) [quoting Taylor (1870, 164)].
2

taboo and emotional ambivalence

danger follows from his immense importance to his subjects,
whether for weal or woe. It is his person which, strictly speaking, regulates the whole course of existence. ‘The people have to
thank him for the rain and sunshine which foster the fruits of
the earth, for the wind which brings ships to their coasts, and
even for the solid ground beneath their feet.’ (Frazer, 1911b, 7.)
These rulers among savage peoples possess a degree of power
and a capacity to confer beneﬁts which are an attribute only of
gods, and with which at later stages of civilization only the most
servile of courtiers would pretend to credit them.
It must strike us as self-contradictory that persons of such
unlimited power should need to be protected so carefully from
the threat of danger; but that is not the only contradiction shown
in the treatment of royal personages among savage peoples. For
these peoples also think it necessary to keep a watch on their
king to see that he makes a proper use of his powers; they feel by
no means convinced of his good intentions or conscientiousness. Thus an element of distrust may be traced among the
reasons for the taboo observances that surround the king. ‘The
idea’, writes Frazer (1911b, 7 f.), ‘that early kingdoms are despotisms in which the people exist only for the sovereign, is
wholly inapplicable to the monarchies we are considering. On
the contrary, the sovereign in them exists only for his subjects;
his life is only valuable so long as he discharges the duties of his
position by ordering the course of nature for his people’s beneﬁt. So soon as he fails to do so, the care, the devotion, the
religious homage which they had hitherto lavished on him cease
and are changed into hatred and contempt; he is dismissed
ignominiously, and may be thankful if he escapes with his life.
Worshipped as a god one day, he is killed as a criminal the next.
But in this changed behaviour of the people there is nothing
capricious or inconstant. On the contrary, their conduct is
entirely of a piece. If their king is their god, he is or should be

51

52

totem and taboo

also their preserver; and if he will not preserve them, he must
make room for another who will. So long, however, as he
answers their expectations, there is no limit to the care which
they take of him, and which they compel him to take of himself.
A king of this sort lives hedged in by a ceremonious etiquette, a
network of prohibitions and observances, of which the intention
is not to contribute to his dignity, much less to his comfort, but
to restrain him from conduct which, by disturbing the harmony
of nature, might involve himself, his people, and the universe in
one common catastrophe. Far from adding to his comfort, these
observances, by trammelling his every act, annihilate his freedom and often render the very life, which it is their object to
preserve, a burden and sorrow to him.’
One of the most glaring instances of a sacred ruler being
fettered and paralysed in this way by taboo ceremonials is to be
found in the mode of life of the Mikado of Japan in earlier
centuries. An account written more than two hundred years ago
reports that the Mikado ‘thinks it would be very prejudicial to
his dignity and holiness to touch the ground with his feet; for
this reason, when he intends to go anywhere, he must be carried
thither on men’s shoulders. Much less will they suﬀer that he
should expose his sacred person to the open air, and the sun is
not thought worthy to shine on his head. There is such a holiness ascribed to all parts of his body that he dares to cut oﬀ
neither his hair, nor his beard, nor his nails. However, lest he
should grow too dirty, they may clean him in the night when he
is asleep; because, they say, that which is taken from his body at
that time hath been stolen from him and that such a theft doth
not prejudice his holiness or dignity. In ancient times he was
obliged to sit on the throne for some hours every morning, with
the imperial crown on his head, but to sit altogether like a statue,
without stirring either hands or feet, head or eyes, nor indeed
any part of his body, because, by this means, it was thought that
he could preserve peace and tranquillity in his empire; for if,

taboo and emotional ambivalence

unfortunately, he turned himself on one side or the other, or if
he looked a good while towards any part of his dominions, it
was apprehended that war, famine, ﬁre, or some other great
misfortune was near at hand to desolate the country.’1
Some of the taboos laid upon barbarian kings remind one
vividly of the restrictions imposed upon murderers. Thus in
West Africa, ‘at Shark Point near Cape Padron, in Lower Guinea,
lives the priestly king Kukulu, alone in a wood. He may not
touch a woman nor leave his house; indeed he may not even quit
his chair, in which he is obliged to sleep sitting, for if he lay
down no wind would arise and navigation would be stopped. He
regulates storms, and in general maintains a wholesome and
equable state of the atmosphere.’ The same writer says of Loango
(in the same part of the world) that the more powerful a king is,
the more taboos he is bound to observe.2 The heir to the throne
is also subject to them from infancy; their number increases as
he advances in life, till at the moment that he ascends the throne
he is positively suﬀocated by them.
Our space will not allow nor does our interest require us to
enter further into a description of the taboos associated with the
dignity of kings and priests. I will only add that the principal
part is played in them by restrictions upon freedom of movement and upon diet. Two examples of taboo ceremonials occurring in civilized communities of a far higher level of culture will
serve to show, however, what a conservative eﬀect upon ancient
usages is exercised by contact with these privileged personages.
The Flamen Dialis, the high priest of Jupiter in ancient Rome,
was obliged to observe an extraordinary number of taboos. He
‘might not ride or even touch a horse, nor see an army under
arms, nor wear a ring which was not broken, nor have a knot on
any part of his garments; . . . he might not touch wheaten ﬂour
1
2

Kaempfer (1727 [1, 150]), quoted by Frazer (1911b, 3 f.).
Frazer (1911b, 5 and 8), quoting Bastian (1874–5 [1, 287 and 355]).

53

54

totem and taboo

or leavened bread; he might not touch or even name a goat, a
dog, raw meat, beans, and ivy; . . . his hair could be cut only by a
free man and with a bronze knife, and his hair and nails when
cut had to be buried under a lucky tree; . . . he might not touch a
dead body; . . . he might not be uncovered in the open air’, and
so on. ‘His wife, the Flaminica, had to observe nearly the same
rules, and others of her own besides. She might not ascend more
than three steps of the kind of staircase called Greek; at a certain
festival she might not comb her hair; the leather of her shoes
might not be made from a beast that had died a natural death,
but only from one that had been slain or sacriﬁced; if she heard
thunder she was tabooed till she had oﬀered an expiatory
sacriﬁce.’ (Frazer, 1911b, 13 f.)
The ancient kings of Ireland were subject to a number of
exceedingly strange restrictions. If these were obeyed, every kind
of blessing would descend upon the country, but if they were
violated, disasters of every kind would visit it. A complete list of
these taboos is contained in the Book of Rights, the two oldest
manuscript copies of which date from 1390 and 1418. The
prohibitions are of the most detailed character, and refer to speciﬁc actions at speciﬁc places at speciﬁc times: the king, for
instance, may not stay in a certain town on a particular day of the
week; he may not cross a certain river at a particular hour of the
day; he may not encamp for nine days on a certain plain, and so
on. (Frazer, 1911b, 11 f.)
Among many savage peoples the severity of these taboo
restrictions upon priestly kings has led to consequences which
have been important historically and are of particular interest
from our point of view. The dignity of their position ceased to be
an enviable thing, and those who were oﬀered it often took
every possible means of escaping it. Thus in Cambodia, where
there are kingships of Fire and Water, it is often necessary to
force successors into accepting these distinctions. On Niuē or
Savage Island, a coral island in the South Paciﬁc, the monarchy

taboo and emotional ambivalence

actually came to an end because no one could be induced to take
over the responsible and dangerous oﬃce. ‘In some parts of West
Africa, when the king dies, a family council is secretly held to
determine his successor. He on whom the choice falls is suddenly seized, bound, and thrown into the fetish-house, where he
is kept in durance till he consents to accept the crown. Sometimes the heir ﬁnds means of evading the honour which it is
thought to thrust upon him; a ferocious chief has been known to
go about constantly armed, resolute to resist by force any
attempt to set him on the throne.’1 Among the natives of Sierra
Leone the objection to accepting the honour of kingship became
so great that most tribes were obliged to choose foreigners as
their kings.
Frazer (1911b, 17–25) attributes to these circumstances the
fact that in the course of history there eventually came about a
division of the original priestly kingship into a spiritual and a
temporal power. Weighed down by the burden of their sacred
oﬃce, kings became unable to exert their dominance in real
aﬀairs and these were left in the hands of inferior but practical
persons, who were ready to renounce the honours of kingship.
These, then, became the temporal rulers, while spiritual
supremacy, deprived of any practical signiﬁcance, was left to the
former taboo kings. It is familiar knowledge how far this
hypothesis ﬁnds conﬁrmation in the history of old Japan.
If we take a general survey of the relations of primitive men to
their rulers, we are left with an expectation that we shall have no
great diﬃculty in advancing from a description of them to a
psycho-analytic understanding of them. Those relations are of a
complex kind and not free from contradictions. Rulers are
allowed great privileges, which coincide exactly with the taboo
prohibitions imposed on other people. They are privileged
1

Frazer (1911b, 17 f.), quoting Bastian (1874–5 [1, 354 and 2, 9]).

55

56

totem and taboo

persons: they may do or enjoy precisely what other people are
forbidden by taboo. As against this freedom, however, we ﬁnd
that they are restricted by other taboos from which common
people are exempt. Here we have a ﬁrst contrast—a contradiction, almost—the fact, that is, of the same individual being both
more free and more restricted. Again, they are regarded as possessing extraordinary powers of magic, so that people are afraid
of coming into contact with their persons or their property,
while on the other hand the most beneﬁcial consequences are
expected from that same contact. Here there seems to be another,
particularly glaring, contradiction; but, as we have already seen,
it is only an apparent one. Contacts originating from the king
himself are healing and protective; the dangerous contacts are
those eﬀected by common men upon the king or his
belongings—probably because they may hint at aggressive
impulses. Yet another contradiction, and one not so easily
resolved, is to be found in the fact that the ruler is believed to
exercise great authority over the forces of Nature, but that he has
to be most carefully protected against the threat of danger—as
though his own power, which can do so much, cannot do this.
The situation is made still more diﬃcult by the fact that the ruler
cannot be trusted to make use of his immense powers in the
right way, that is, for the beneﬁt of his subjects and for his own
protection. Thus people distrust him and feel justiﬁed in keeping
a watch on him. The etiquette of taboos to which the king’s
whole life is subjected serves all these protective purposes at
once: his own protection from dangers and the protection of his
subjects from the dangers with which he threatens them.
It seems plausible to explain the complicated and contradictory attitude of primitive peoples to their rulers in some
such way as the following. For superstitious and other reasons, a
variety of diﬀerent impulses ﬁnd expression in relation to kings;
and each of these impulses is developed to an extreme point
without regard to the others. This gives rise to contradictions—

taboo and emotional ambivalence

by which, incidentally, a savage intellect is as little disturbed as is
a highly civilized one when it comes to such matters as religion
or ‘loyalty’.
So far so good; but the technique of psycho-analysis allows us
to go into the question further and to enter more into the details
of these various impulses. If we submit the recorded facts to
analysis, as though they formed part of the symptoms presented
by a neurosis, our starting-point must be the excessive apprehensiveness and solicitude which is put forward as the reason for
the taboo ceremonials. The occurrence of excessive solicitude of
this kind is very common in neuroses, and especially in obsessional neuroses, with which our comparison is chieﬂy drawn.
We have come to understand its origin quite clearly. It appears
wherever, in addition to a predominant feeling of aﬀection,
there is also a contrary, but unconscious, current of hostility—a
state of aﬀairs which represents a typical instance of an ambivalent emotional attitude. The hostility is then shouted down, as it
were, by an excessive intensiﬁcation of the aﬀection, which is
expressed as solicitude and becomes compulsive, because it
might otherwise be inadequate to perform its task of keeping the
unconscious contrary current of feeling under repression. Every
psychoanalyst knows from experience with what certainty this
explanation of solicitous over-aﬀection is found to apply even in
the most unlikely circumstances—in cases, for instance, of
attachments between a mother and child or between a devoted
married couple. If we now apply this to the case of privileged
persons, we shall realize that alongside of the veneration, and
indeed idolization, felt towards them, there is in the
unconscious an opposing current of intense hostility; that, in
fact, as we expected, we are faced by a situation of emotional
ambivalence. The distrust which provides one of the unmistakable elements in kingly taboos would thus be another, more
direct, expression of the same unconscious hostility. Indeed,
owing to the variety of outcomes of a conﬂict of this kind which

57

58

totem and taboo

are reached among diﬀerent peoples, we are not at a loss for
examples in which the existence of this hostility is still more
obviously shown. ‘The savage Timmes of Sierra Leone’, we learn
from Frazer,1 ‘who elect their king, reserve to themselves the
right of beating him on the eve of his coronation; and they avail
themselves of this constitutional privilege with such hearty
goodwill that sometimes the unhappy monarch does not long
survive his elevation to the throne. Hence when the leading
chiefs have a spite at a man and wish to rid themselves of him,
they elect him king.’ Even in glaring instances like this, however,
the hostility is not admitted as such, but masquerades as a
ceremonial.
Another side of the attitude of primitive peoples towards their
rulers recalls a procedure which is common in neuroses generally but comes into the open in what are known as delusions of
persecution. The importance of one particular person is
immensely exaggerated and his absolute power is magniﬁed to
the most improbable degree, in order that it may be easier to
make him responsible for everything disagreeable that the
patient may experience. Savages are really behaving in just the
same way with their kings when they ascribe to them power
over rain and sunshine, wind and weather, and then depose
them or kill them because Nature disappoints their hopes of a
successful hunt or a rich harvest. The model upon which paranoiacs base their delusions of persecution is the relation of a
child to his father. A son’s picture of his father is habitually
clothed with excessive powers of this kind, and it is found that
distrust of the father is intimately linked with admiration for
him. When a paranoiac turns the ﬁgure of one of his associates
into a ‘persecutor’, he is raising him to the rank of a father: he is
putting him into a position in which he can blame him for all
his misfortunes. Thus this second analogy between savages and
1

Frazer (1911b, 18), quoting Zweifel and Moustier (1880 [28]).

taboo and emotional ambivalence

neurotics gives us a glimpse of the truth that much of a savage’s
attitude to his ruler is derived from a child’s infantile attitude to
his father.
But the strongest support for our eﬀort to equate taboo prohibitions with neurotic symptoms is to be found in the taboo
ceremonials themselves, the eﬀect of which upon the position of
royalty has already been discussed. These ceremonials unmistakably reveal their double meaning and their derivation from
ambivalent impulses, as soon as we are ready to allow that the
results which they bring about were intended from the ﬁrst. The
taboo does not only pick out the king and exalt him above all
common mortals, it also makes his existence a torment and an
intolerable burden and reduces him to a bondage far worse than
that of his subjects. Here, then, we have an exact counterpart of
the obsessional act in the neurosis, in which the suppressed
impulse and the impulse that suppresses it ﬁnd simultaneous
and common satisfaction. The obsessional act is ostensibly a protection against the prohibited act; but actually, in our view, it is a
repetition of it. The ‘ostensibly’ applies to the conscious part of the
mind, and the ‘actually’ to the unconscious part. In exactly the same
way, the ceremonial taboo of kings is ostensibly the highest honour and protection for them, while actually it is a punishment for
their exaltation, a revenge taken on them by their subjects. The
experiences of Sancho Panza (as described by Cervantes) when
he was Governor of his island convinced him that this view of
court ceremonial was the only one that met the case. If we could
hear the views of modern kings and rulers on the subject, we
might ﬁnd that there were many others who agreed with him.
The question of why the emotional attitude towards rulers
includes such a powerful unconscious element of hostility raises
a very interesting problem, but one that lies outside the limits of
the present study. I have already hinted at the fact that the child’s
complex of emotions towards his father—the father-complex—
has a bearing on the subject, and I may add that more

59

60

totem and taboo

information on the early history of the kingship would throw a
decisive light on it. Frazer (1911a) has put forward impressive
reasons, though, as he himself admits, not wholly conclusive
ones, for supposing that the earliest kings were foreigners who,
after a brief reign, were sacriﬁced with solemn festivities as
representatives of the deity. It is possible that the course taken by
the evolution of kings may also have had an inﬂuence upon the
myths of Christendom.
(c) The taboo upon the dead
We know that the dead are powerful rulers; but we may perhaps
be surprised when we learn that they are treated as enemies.
The taboo upon the dead is—if I may revert to the simile of
infection—specially virulent among most primitive peoples. It is
manifested, in the ﬁrst instance, in the consequences that follow
contact with the dead and in the treatment of mourners.
Among the Maoris anyone who had handled a corpse or taken
any part in its burial was in the highest degree unclean and was
almost cut oﬀ from intercourse with his fellow-men, or, as we
might put it, was boycotted. He could not enter any house, or
come into contact with any person or thing without infecting
them. He might not even touch food with his hands, which,
owing to their uncleanness, had become quite useless. ‘Food
would be set for him on the ground, and he would then sit or
kneel down, and, with his hands carefully held behind his back,
would gnaw at it as best he could. In some cases he would be fed
by another person, who with outstretched arm contrived to do it
without touching the tabooed man; but the feeder was himself
subjected to many severe restrictions, little less onerous than
those which were imposed upon the other. In almost every
populous village there lived a degraded wretch, the lowest of the
low, who earned a sorry pittance by thus waiting upon the
deﬁled.’ He alone was allowed ‘to associate at arm’s length with

taboo and emotional ambivalence

one who had paid the last oﬃces . . . to the dead. And when, the
dismal term of his seclusion being over, the mourner was about
to mix with his fellows once more, all the dishes he had used in
his seclusion were diligently smashed, and all the garments he
had worn were carefully thrown away.’ [Frazer, 1911b, 138 f.]
The taboo observances after bodily contact with the dead are
the same over the whole of Polynesia, Melanesia and a part of
Africa. Their most regular feature is the prohibition against those
who have had such contact touching food themselves, and the
consequent necessity for their being fed by other people. It is a
remarkable fact that in Polynesia (though the report may perhaps
refer only to Hawaii) priestly kings were subject to the same
restriction while performing their sacred functions.1 The case of
the taboo upon the dead in Tonga oﬀers a specially clear instance
of the way in which the degree of prohibition varies according
to the taboo power of the person upon whom the taboo is
imposed. Thus anyone who touches a dead chief is unclean for
ten months; but if he himself is a chief he is only tabooed for
three, four, or ﬁve months according to the rank of the dead
man; but if the dead man were the ‘great divine chief ’, even the
greatest chief would be tabooed for ten months. These savages
believe ﬁrmly that anyone who violates the taboo ordinances is
bound to fall ill and die; indeed they believe it so ﬁrmly that, in
the opinion of an observer, ‘no native ever made an experiment
to prove the contrary’.2
Essentially the same prohibitions (though from our point of
view they are more interesting) apply to those who have been in
contact with the dead only in a metaphorical sense: the dead
person’s mourning relations, widowers and widows. The observances that we have so far mentioned may seem merely to give
characteristic expression to the virulence of the taboo and its
1
2

Frazer (loc. cit.) [quoting Ellis (1832–6, 4, 388)].
Frazer (1911b 140), quoting Mariner (1818 [1, 141]).

61

62

totem and taboo

contagious power. But those which now follow give us a hint at
the reasons for the taboo—both the ostensible ones and what we
must regard as the deep-lying real ones.
‘Among the Shuswap of British Columbia widows and widowers in mourning are secluded and forbidden to touch their
own head or body; the cups and cooking vessels which they use
may be used by no one else. . . . No hunter would come near
such mourners, for their presence is unlucky. If their shadow
were to fall on anyone, he would be taken ill at once. They
employ thorn-bushes for bed and pillow . . . and thorn-bushes
are also laid all around their beds.’1 This last measure is
designed to keep the dead person’s ghost at a distance. The same
purpose is shown still more clearly in the usage reported from
another North American tribe which provides that, after her
husband’s death, ‘a widow would wear a breech-cloth made of
dry bunch-grass for several days to prevent her husband’s ghost
having intercourse with her.’2 This suggests that contact ‘in a
metaphorical sense’ is after all understood as being bodily contact, for the dead man’s ghost does not leave his relations and
does not cease to ‘hover’ round them during the time of
mourning.
‘Among the Agutainos, who inhabit Palawan, one of the
Philippine Islands, a widow may not leave her hut for seven or
eight days after the death; and even then she may only go out at
an hour when she is not likely to meet anybody, for whoever
looks upon her dies a sudden death. To prevent this fatal catastrophe, the widow knocks with a wooden peg on the trees as
she goes along, thus warning people of her dangerous proximity; and the very trees on which she knocks soon die.’3 The
nature of the danger feared from a widow such as this is made
1

[Frazer (1911b, 142), quoting Boas (1890, 643 f.).]
[Frazer (1911b, 143), quoting Teit (1900, 332 f.).]
3
[Frazer (1911b, 144), quoting Blumentritt (1891, 182).]
2

taboo and emotional ambivalence

plain by another example. ‘In the Mekeo district of British New
Guinea a widower loses all his civil rights and becomes a social
outcast, an object of fear and horror, shunned by all. He may not
cultivate a garden, nor show himself in public, nor walk on the
roads and paths. Like a wild beast he must skulk in the long grass
and the bushes; and if he sees or hears anyone coming, especially
a woman, he must hide behind a tree or a thicket.’1 This last hint
makes it easy to trace the origin of the dangerous character of
widowers or widows to the danger of temptation. A man who has
lost his wife must resist a desire to ﬁnd a substitute for her; a
widow must ﬁght against the same wish and is moreover liable,
being without a lord and master, to arouse the desires of other
men. Substitutive satisfactions of such a kind run counter to the
sense of mourning and they would inevitably kindle the ghost’s
wrath.2
One of the most puzzling, but at the same time instructive,
usages in connection with mourning is the prohibition against
uttering the name of the dead person. This custom is extremely
widespread, it is expressed in a variety of ways and has had
important consequences. It is found not only among the Australians and Polynesians (who usually show us taboo observances in
the best state of preservation), but also among ‘peoples so
widely separated from each other as the Samoyeds of Siberia and
the Todas of southern India; the Mongols of Tartary and the
Tuaregs of the Sahara; the Ainos of Japan and the Akamba and
Nandi of central Africa; the Tinguianes of the Philippines and
the inhabitants of the Nicobar Islands, of Borneo, of Madagascar,
and of Tasmania.’ (Frazer, 1911b, 353.) In some of these cases the
1

[Frazer (1911b, 144), quoting Guis (1902, 208 f.).]
The patient whose ‘impossibilities’ I compared with taboos earlier in this
paper (see page 33) told me that whenever she met anyone dressed in mourning in the street she was ﬁlled with indignation: such people, she thought,
should be forbidden to go out.
2

63

64

totem and taboo

prohibition and its consequences last only during the period of
mourning, in others they are permanent; but it seems invariably
to diminish in strictness with the passage of time.
The avoidance of the name of a dead person is as a rule
enforced with extreme severity. Thus in some South American
tribes it is regarded as a deadly insult to the survivors to mention
the name of a dead relative in their presence, and the punishment for it is not less than that laid down for murder. (Ibid.,
352.) It is not easy at ﬁrst to see why the mention of the name
should be regarded with such horror; but the dangers involved
have given rise to a whole number of methods of evasion which
are interesting and important in various ways. Thus the Masai in
East Africa resort to the device of changing the dead man’s name
immediately after his death; he may then be mentioned freely
under his new name while all the restrictions remain attached to
the old one. This seems to presuppose that the dead man’s ghost
does not know and will not get to know his new name. [Ibid.,
354.] The Adelaide and Encounter Bay tribes of South Australia
are so consistently careful that after a death everyone bearing the
same name as the dead man’s, or a very similar one, changes it
for another. [Ibid., 355.] In some instances, as for instance
among certain tribes in Victoria and in North-West America, this
is carried a step further, and after a death all the dead person’s
relations change their names, irrespective of any similarity in
their sound. [Ibid., 357.] Indeed, among the Guaycurus in Paraguay, when a death had taken place, the chief used to change the
name of every member of the tribe; and ‘from that moment
everybody remembered his new name just as if he had borne it
all his life’.1
Moreover, if the name of the dead man happens to be the
same as that of an animal or common object, some tribes think it
necessary to give these animals or objects new names, so that the
1

Frazer (1911b, 357), quoting an old Spanish observer [Lozano (1733, 70)].

taboo and emotional ambivalence

use of the former names shall not recall the dead man to memory. This usage leads to a perpetual change of vocabulary, which
causes much diﬃculty to the missionaries, especially when such
changes are permanent. In the seven years which the missionary
Dobrizhoﬀer spent among the Abipones of Paraguay, ‘the native
word for jaguar was changed thrice, and the words for crocodile,
thorn, and the slaughter of cattle underwent similar though less
varied vicissitudes’.1 The dread of uttering a dead person’s
name extends, indeed, to an avoidance of the mention of anything in which the dead man played a part; and an important
consequence of this process of suppression is that these peoples
possess no tradition and no historical memory, so that any
research into their early history is faced by the greatest diﬃculties. [Ibid., 362 f.] A number of these primitive races have, however, adopted compensatory usages which revive the names of
dead persons after a long period of mourning by giving them to
children, who are thus regarded as reincarnations of the dead.
[Ibid., 364 f.]
This taboo upon names will seem less puzzling if we bear in
mind the fact that savages regard a name as an essential part of a
man’s personality and as an important possession: they treat
words in every sense as things. As I have pointed out elsewhere
[Freud, 1905b, Chap. IV], our own children do the same. They are
never ready to accept a similarity between two words as having
no meaning; they consistently assume that if two things are
called by similar-sounding names this must imply the existence
of some deep-lying point of agreement between them. Even a
civilized adult may be able to infer from certain peculiarities in
his own behaviour that he is not so far removed as he may have
thought from attributing importance to proper names, and that
his own name has become to a very remarkable extent bound up
with his personality. So, too, psycho-analytic practice comes
1

Frazer (1911b, 360), quoting Dobrizhoﬀer [1784, 2, 301].

65

66

totem and taboo

upon frequent conﬁrmations of this in the evidence it ﬁnds of
the importance of names in unconscious mental activities.1
As was only to be expected, obsessional neurotics behave
exactly like savages in relation to names. Like other neurotics,
they show a high degree of ‘complexive sensitiveness’2 in
regard to uttering or hearing particular words and names; and
their attitude towards their own names imposes numerous, and
often serious, inhibitions upon them. One of these taboo
patients of my acquaintance had adopted a rule against writing
her own name, for fear that it might fall into the hands of someone who would then be in possession of a portion of her personality. She was obliged to ﬁght with convulsive loyalty against
the temptations to which her imagination subjected her, and so
forbade herself ‘to surrender any part of her person’. This
included in the ﬁrst place her name, and later extended to her
handwriting, till ﬁnally she gave up writing altogether.
We shall no longer feel surprised, therefore, at savages regarding the name of a dead person as a portion of his personality and
making it subject to the relevant taboo. So, too, uttering the
name of a dead person is clearly a derivative of having contact
with him. We may therefore turn to the wider problem of why
such contact is submitted to so strict a taboo.
The most obvious explanation would point to horror roused by
dead bodies and by the changes which quickly become visible in
them. Some part must also be played in the matter by mourning
for the dead person, since it must be a motive force in everything
relating to him. But horror at the corpse clearly does not account
for all the details of the taboo observances, and mourning cannot explain why the uttering of the dead man’s name is an insult
1

Cf. Stekel [1911] and Abraham [1912].
[Komplexempﬁndlichkeit—a term used by Jung in connection with his word
association experiments.]
2

taboo and emotional ambivalence

to his survivors. Mourning, on the contrary, tends to be preoccupied with the dead man, to dwell upon his memory and to
preserve it as long as possible. Something other than mourning
must be held responsible for the peculiarities of the taboo
usages, something which has very diﬀerent purposes in view. It
is precisely the taboo upon names that gives us the clue to this
unknown motive; and if the usages alone did not tell us, we
should learn it from what the mourning savages say to us
themselves.
For they make no disguise of the fact that they are afraid of the
presence or of the return of the dead person’s ghost; and they
perform a great number of ceremonies to keep him at a distance
or drive him oﬀ.1 They feel that to utter his name is equivalent
to invoking him and will quickly be followed by his presence.2
And accordingly they do everything they can to avoid any such
evocation. They disguise themselves so that the ghost shall not
recognize them,3 or they change his name or their own; they
are furious with reckless strangers who by uttering the ghost’s
name incite him against the survivors. It is impossible to escape
the conclusion that, in the words of Wundt (1906, 49), they are
victims to a fear of ‘the dead man’s soul which has become a
demon’. Here, then, we seem to have found a conﬁrmation of
Wundt’s view, which, as we have already seen (p. 24), considers
that the essence of taboo is a fear of demons.
This theory is based on a supposition so extraordinary that it
seems at ﬁrst sight incredible: the supposition, namely, that a
dearly loved relative at the moment of his death changes into
a demon, from whom his survivors can expect nothing but
1

Frazer (1911b 353) mentions the Tuaregs of the Sahara as an example of this
explanation being given by the savages themselves.
2
Subject, perhaps, to the condition that some of his bodily remains are still in
existence. (Ibid., 372.)
3
In the Nicobar Islands. (Ibid., 358.)

67

68

totem and taboo

hostility and against whose evil desires they must protect themselves by every possible means. Nevertheless, almost all the
authorities are at one in attributing these views to primitive
peoples. Westermarck, who, in my opinion, takes far too little
notice of taboo in his book on The Origin and Development of the Moral
Ideas, actually writes in his chapter on ‘Regard for the Dead’:
‘Generally speaking, my collection of facts has led me to the
conclusion that the dead are more commonly regarded as
enemies than friends, and that Professor Jevons and Mr. Grant
Allen are mistaken in their assertion that, according to early
beliefs, the malevolence of the dead is for the most part directed
against strangers only, whereas they exercise a fatherly care over
the lives and fortunes of their descendants and fellow clansmen.’1
In an interesting volume, Rudolf Kleinpaul (1898) has used
the remnants among civilized races of the ancient belief in
spirits to throw light on the relation between the living and the
dead. He, too, reaches the ﬁnal conclusion that the dead, ﬁlled
with a lust for murder, sought to drag the living in their train.
The dead slew; and the skeleton which we use to-day to picture
the dead stands for the fact that they themselves were slayers. The
living did not feel safe from the attacks of the dead till there was
a sheet of water between them. That is why men liked to bury
the dead on islands or on the farther side of rivers; and that, in
Westermarck (1906–8, 2, 532 ﬀ.). In his footnotes and in the section of the
text which follows, the author gives copious conﬁrmatory evidence, often of a
highly characteristic sort. For instance: ‘Among the Maoris the nearest and
most beloved relatives were supposed to have their natures changed by death,
and to become malignant, even towards those they formerly loved. [Quoting
Taylor (1870, 18).] . . . Australian natives believed that a deceased person is
malevolent for a long time after death, and the more nearly related the more he
is feared. [Quoting Fraser (1892, 80).] . . . According to ideas prevalent among
the Central Eskimo, the dead are at ﬁrst malevolent spirits who frequently roam
around the villages, causing sickness and mischief and killing men by their
touch; but subsequently they are supposed to attain rest and are no longer
feared. [Quoting Boas (1888, 591).]’
1

taboo and emotional ambivalence

turn, is the origin of such phrases as ‘Here and in the Beyond’.
Later, the malignity of the dead diminished and was restricted to
special categories which had a particular right to feel
resentment—such as murdered men, for instance, who in the
form of evil spirits went in pursuit of their murderers, or brides,
who had died with their desires unsatisﬁed. But originally, says
Kleinpaul, all of the dead were vampires, all of them had a
grudge against the living and sought to injure them and rob
them of their lives. It was from corpses that the concept of evil
spirits ﬁrst arose.
The hypothesis that after their death those most beloved were
transformed into demons clearly raises further questions. What
was it that induced primitive men to attribute such a change of
feeling to those who had been dear to them? Why did they make
them into demons? Westermarck (1906–8, 2, 534 f.) is of the
opinion that these questions can be answered easily. ‘Death is
commonly regarded as the gravest of all misfortunes; hence the
dead are believed to be exceedingly dissatisﬁed with their fate.
According to primitive ideas a person only dies if he is killed—
by magic if not by force—and such a death naturally tends to
make the soul revengeful and ill-tempered. It is envious of the
living and is longing for the company of its old friends; no
wonder, then, that it sends them diseases to cause their
death. . . . But the notion that the disembodied soul is on the
whole a malicious being . . . is also, no doubt, intimately connected with the instinctive fear of the dead, which is in its turn
the outcome of the fear of death.’
The study of psycho-neurotic disorders suggests a more comprehensive explanation, which at the same time covers that put
forward by Westermarck.
When a wife has lost her husband or a daughter her mother, it
not infrequently happens that the survivor is overwhelmed by
tormenting doubts (to which we give the name of ‘obsessive

69

70

totem and taboo

self-reproaches’) as to whether she may not herself have been
responsible for the death of this cherished being through some
act of carelessness or neglect. No amount of recollection of the
care she lavished on the suﬀerer, no amount of objective disproof of the accusation, serves to bring the torment to an end. It
may be regarded as a pathological form of mourning, and with
the passage of time it gradually dies away. The psycho-analytic
investigation of such cases has revealed the secret motives of the
disorder. We ﬁnd that in a certain sense these obsessive selfreproaches are justiﬁed, and that this is why they are proof
against contradictions and protests. It is not that the mourner
was really responsible for the death or was really guilty of neglect, as the self-reproaches declare to be the case. None the less
there was something in her—a wish that was unconscious to
herself—which would not have been dissatisﬁed by the occurrence of death and which might actually have brought it about if
it had had the power. And after death has occurred, it is against
this unconscious wish that the reproaches are a reaction. In
almost every case where there is an intense emotional attachment to a particular person we ﬁnd that behind the tender love
there is a concealed hostility in the unconscious. This is the
classical example, the prototype, of the ambivalence of human
emotions. This ambivalence is present to a greater or less amount
in the innate disposition of everyone; normally, there is not so
much of it as to produce the obsessive self-reproaches we are
considering. Where, however, it is copiously present in the disposition, it will manifest itself precisely in the subject’s relation
to those of whom he is most fond, in the place, in fact, where
one would least expect to ﬁnd it. It must be supposed that the
presence of a particularly large amount of this original
emotional ambivalence is characteristic of the disposition of
obsessional neurotics—whom I have so often brought up for
comparison in this discussion upon taboo.
We have now discovered a motive which can explain the idea

taboo and emotional ambivalence

that the souls of those who have just died are transformed into
demons and the necessity felt by survivors to protect themselves
by taboos against their hostility. Let us suppose that the emotional life of primitive peoples is characterized by an amount of
ambivalence as great as that which we are led by the ﬁndings of
psycho-analysis to attribute to obsessional patients. It then
becomes easy to understand how after a painful bereavement
savages should be obliged to produce a reaction against the hostility latent in their unconscious similar to that expressed as
obsessive self-reproach in the case of neurotics. But this hostility,
distressingly felt in the unconscious as satisfaction over the
death, is diﬀerently dealt with among primitive peoples. The
defence against it takes the form of displacing it on to the object
of the hostility, on to the dead themselves. This defensive procedure, which is a common one both in normal and in pathological mental life, is known as a ‘projection’. The survivor thus
denies that he has ever harboured any hostile feelings against the
dead loved one; the soul of the dead harbours them instead and
seeks to put them into action during the whole period of
mourning. In spite of the successful defence which the survivor
achieves by means of projection, his emotional reaction shows
the characteristics of punishment and remorse, for he is the
subject of fears and submits to renunciations and restrictions,
though these are in part disguised as measures of protection
against the hostile demon. Once again, therefore, we ﬁnd that
the taboo has grown up on the basis of an ambivalent emotional
attitude. The taboo upon the dead arises, like the others, from
the contrast between conscious pain and unconscious satisfaction over the death that has occurred. Since such is the origin of
the ghost’s resentment, it follows naturally that the survivors
who have the most to fear will be those who were formerly its
nearest and dearest.
In this respect taboo observances, like neurotic symptoms,
have a double sense. On the one hand, in their restrictive

71

72

totem and taboo

character, they are expressions of mourning; but on the other
hand they clearly betray—what they seek to conceal—hostility
against the dead disguised as self-defence. We have already
learned that certain taboos arise out of fear of temptation. The
fact that a dead man is helpless is bound to act as an encouragement to the survivor to give free rein to his hostile passions, and
that temptation must be countered by a prohibition.
Westermarck is right in insisting that savages draw no distinction between violent and natural death. In the view of
unconscious thinking, a man who has died a natural death is a
murdered man: evil wishes have killed him.1 Anyone who
investigates the origin and signiﬁcance of dreams of the death of
loved relatives (of parents or brothers or sisters) will be able to
convince himself that dreamers, children and savages are at one
in their attitude towards the dead—an attitude based upon
emotional ambivalence.2
At the beginning of this essay [p. 24] disagreement was
expressed with Wundt’s opinion that the essence of taboo was a
fear of demons. Yet we have now assented to an explanation that
derives the taboo upon the dead from a fear of the soul of the
dead person transformed into a demon. The apparent contradiction can easily be resolved. It is true that we have accepted
the presence of demons, but not as something ultimate and
psychologically unanalysable. We have succeeded, as it were, in
getting behind the demons, for we have explained them as
projections of hostile feelings harboured by the survivors
against the dead.
Both of the two sets of feelings (the aﬀectionate and the hostile), which, as we have good reason to believe, exist towards the
dead person, seek to take eﬀect at the time of the bereavement, as
mourning and as satisfaction. There is bound to be a conﬂict
1
2

Cf. the next essay in this volume.
[Cf. Freud: The Interpretation of Dreams (1900), English translation, 1932, 242 ﬀ.]

taboo and emotional ambivalence

between these two contrary feelings; and, since one of the two,
the hostility, is wholly or for the greater part unconscious, the
outcome of the conﬂict cannot be to subtract, as it were, the
feeling with the lesser intensity from that with the greater and
to establish the remainder in consciousness—as occurs, for
instance, when one forgives a slight that one has received from
someone of whom one is fond. The process is dealt with
instead by the special psychical mechanism known in psychoanalysis, as I have said, by the name of ‘projection’. The hostility, of which the survivors know nothing and moreover wish to
know nothing, is ejected from internal perception into the
external world, and thus detached from them and pushed on to
someone else. It is no longer true that they are rejoicing to be
rid of the dead man; on the contrary, they are mourning for
him; but, strange to say, he has turned into a wicked demon
ready to gloat over their misfortunes and eager to kill them. It
then becomes necessary for them, the survivors, to defend
themselves against this evil enemy; they are relieved of pressure
from within, but have only exchanged it for oppression from
without.
It cannot be disputed that this process of projection, which
turns a dead man into a malignant enemy, is able to ﬁnd support
in any real acts of hostility on his part that may be recollected
and felt as a grudge against him: his severity, his love of power,
his unfairness, or whatever else may form the background of
even the tenderest of human relationships. But it cannot be such
a simple matter as that. This factor alone cannot explain the
creation of demons by projection. The faults of the dead no
doubt provide a part of the explanation of the survivors’ hostility; but they would not operate in this way unless the survivors
had ﬁrst developed hostility on their own account. The moment
of death, moreover, would certainly seem to be a most
inappropriate occasion for recalling any justiﬁable grounds of
complaint that might exist. It is impossible to escape the fact that

73

74

totem and taboo

the true determining factor is invariably unconscious hostility. A
hostile current of feeling such as this against a person’s nearest
and dearest relatives may remain latent during their lifetime, that
is, its existence may not be betrayed to consciousness either
directly or through some substitute. But when they die this is no
longer possible and the conﬂict becomes acute. The mourning
which derives from an intensiﬁcation of the aﬀectionate feelings
becomes on the one hand more impatient of the latent hostility
and, on the other hand, will not allow it to give rise to any sense
of satisfaction. Accordingly, there follow the repression of the
unconscious hostility by the method of projection and the construction of the ceremonial which gives expression to the fear of
being punished by the demons. When in course of time the
mourning runs its course, the conﬂict grows less acute, so that
the taboo upon the dead is able to diminish in severity or sink
into oblivion.

(4)
Having thus explained the basis of the exceedingly instructive
taboo upon the dead, we must not omit to add a few remarks
that may help to increase our understanding of taboo in
general.
The projection of unconscious hostility on to demons in the
case of the taboo upon the dead is only a single instance of a
number of processes to which the greatest inﬂuence must be
attributed in the shaping of the primitive mind. In the case we
have been dealing with, projection served the purpose of dealing
with an emotional conﬂict; and it is employed in the same way
in a large number of psychical situations that lead to neuroses.
But projection was not created for the purpose of defence; it also
occurs where there is no conﬂict. The projection outwards of
internal perceptions is a primitive mechanism, to which, for
instance, our sense perceptions are subject, and which therefore

taboo and emotional ambivalence

normally plays a very large part in determining the form taken
by our external world. Under conditions whose nature has not
yet been suﬃciently established, internal perceptions of
emotional and intellective processes can be projected outwards
in the same way as sense perceptions; they are thus employed for
building up the external world, though they should by rights
remain part of the internal world. This may have some genetic
connection with the fact that the function of attention was originally directed not towards the internal world but towards the
stimuli that stream in from the external world, and that that
function’s only information upon endopsychic processes was
received from feelings of pleasure and unpleasure. It was not
until a language of abstract thought had been developed, that is
to say, not until the sensory residues of verbal presentations had
been linked to the internal processes, that the latter themselves
gradually became capable of being perceived. Before that, owing
to the projection outwards of internal perceptions, primitive
men arrived at a picture of the external world which we, with
our intensiﬁed conscious perception, have now to translate back
into psychology.
The projection of their own evil impulses into demons is only
one portion of a system which constituted the Weltanschauung
[view of the universe] of primitive peoples, and which we shall
come to know as ‘animism’ in the following essay. There we
shall have to investigate that system’s psychological characteristics, and we shall do so once again by reference to the similar
systems which we ﬁnd constructed by neurotics. For the
moment I will only say that the prototype of all such systems is
what we have termed the ‘secondary revision’ of the content of
dreams.1 And we must not forget that, at and after the stage at
which systems are constructed, two sets of reasons can be
assigned for every psychical event that is consciously judged—
[Cf. Freud: The Interpretation of Dreams (1900), English translation, 1932, 451 ﬀ.]

1

75

76

totem and taboo

one set belonging to the system and the other set real but
unconscious.1
Wundt (1906, 129) remarks that ‘among the activities attributed by myths all over the world to demons, the harmful predominate, so that in popular belief bad demons are clearly older
than good ones’. It is quite possible that the whole concept of
demons was derived from the important relation of the living to
the dead. The ambivalence inherent in that relation was
expressed in the subsequent course of human development by
the fact that, from the same root, it gave rise to two completely
opposed psychical structures: on the one hand fear of demons
and ghosts and on the other hand veneration of ancestors.2 The
fact that demons are always regarded as the spirits of those who
have died recently shows better than anything the inﬂuence of
mourning on the origin of the belief in demons. Mourning has a
quite speciﬁc psychical task to perform: its function is to detach
the survivors’ memories and hopes from the dead. When this
has been achieved, the pain grows less and with it the remorse
and self-reproaches and consequently the fear of the demon as
well. And the same spirits who to begin with were feared as
demons may now expect to meet with friendlier treatment, they
are revered as ancestors and appeals are made to them for help.
If we follow the changing relations between survivors and the
1

[Further explained below, p. 94 f.] The projected creations of primitive men
resemble the personiﬁcations constructed by creative writers; for the latter
externalize in the form of separate individuals the opposing instinctual
impulses struggling within them.
2
In the course of psycho-analyses of neurotics who suﬀer (or who suﬀered in
their childhood) from fear of ghosts, it is often possible to show without much
diﬃculty that the ghosts are disguises for the patient’s parents. Cf. in this
connection a paper upon ‘Sexual Ghosts’ by Haeberlin (1912). Here the person
concerned was not the subject’s parent (who was dead) but someone else of
erotic signiﬁcance to him.

taboo and emotional ambivalence

dead through the course of ages, it becomes obvious that there
has been an extraordinary diminution in ambivalence. It is now
quite easy to keep down the unconscious hostility to the dead
(though its existence can still be traced) without any particular
expenditure of psychical energy. Where, in earlier times, satisﬁed hatred and pained aﬀection fought each other, we now ﬁnd
that a kind of scar has been formed in the shape of piety, which
declares ‘de mortuis nil nisi bonum’. It is only neurotics whose
mourning for the loss of those dear to them is still troubled by
obsessive self-reproaches—the secret of which is revealed by
psycho-analysis as the old emotional ambivalence. We need not
discuss here how this alteration came about or how much share
in it is due to a constitutional modiﬁcation and how much to a
real improvement in family relations. But this example suggests
the probability that the psychical impulses of primitive peoples
were characterized by a higher amount of ambivalence than is to
be found in modern civilized man. It is to be supposed that as
this ambivalence diminished, taboo (a symptom of the ambivalence and a compromise between the two conﬂicting impulses)
slowly disappeared.1 Neurotics, who are obliged to reproduce
the struggle and the taboo resulting from it, may be said to have
inherited an archaic constitution as an atavistic vestige; the need
to compensate for this at the behest of civilization is what drives
them to their immense expenditure of mental energy.
And here we may recall the obscure and puzzling statement by
Wundt on the double meaning of the word taboo: ‘sacred’ and
‘unclean’. (See above [p. 30].) Originally, according to him, the
word did not possess these two meanings, but described ‘what is
demonic’, ‘what may not be touched’, thus stressing an important characteristic common to both the extreme concepts. The
persistence, however (he added), of this common characteristic
was evidence that the ground covered by the two—the sacred
1

[The last two sentences are in spaced type in the original.]

77

78

totem and taboo

and the unclean—was originally one and did not become
diﬀerentiated until later.
Our discussions, on the contrary, lead us to the simple conclusion that the word ‘taboo’ had a double meaning from the
very ﬁrst and that it was used to designate a particular kind of
ambivalence and whatever arose from it. ‘Taboo’ is itself an
ambivalent word; and one feels on looking back that the wellattested meaning of the word should alone have made it possible
to infer—what has actually been arrived at as a result of extensive researches—that the prohibitions of taboo are to be understood as consequences of an emotional ambivalence. Study of
the earliest languages has taught us that there were once many
such words, which expressed contrary ideas and in a sense
(though not in quite the same sense as the word ‘taboo’) were
ambivalent.1 Slight modiﬁcations in the pronunciation of the
antithetical ‘primal word’ made it possible subsequently to give
separate verbal expression to the two contrary ideas which were
originally combined in it.
The word ‘taboo’ met with a diﬀerent fate. As the importance
of the ambivalence denoted by it diminished, the word itself, or
rather the words analogous to it, fell out of use. I hope to be able,
in a later connection, to make it probable that a deﬁnite historical chain of events is concealed behind the fate of this concept:
that the word was at ﬁrst attached to certain quite speciﬁc
human relations which were characterized by great emotional
ambivalence, and that its use then spread on to other analogous
relations.
If I am not mistaken, the explanation of taboo also throws light
on the nature and origin of conscience. It is possible, without any
stretching of the sense of the terms, to speak of a taboo conscience or, after a taboo has been violated, of a taboo sense of
1

Cf. my review of Abel’s ‘Antithetical Sense of Primal Words’ [Freud, 1910].

taboo and emotional ambivalence

guilt. Taboo conscience is probably the earliest form in which
the phenomenon of conscience is met with.
For what is ‘conscience’? On the evidence of language it is
related to that of which one is ‘most certainly conscious’.
Indeed, in some languages the words for ‘conscience’ and ‘conscious’ can scarcely be distinguished.1
Conscience is the internal perception of the rejection of a
particular wish operating within us. The stress, however, is upon
the fact that this rejection has no need to appeal to anything else
for support, that it is quite ‘certain of itself ’. This is even clearer
in the case of consciousness of guilt—the perception of the
internal condemnation of an act by which we have carried out a
particular wish. To put forward any reason for this would seem
superﬂuous: anyone who has a conscience must feel within him
the justiﬁcation for the condemnation, must feel the selfreproach for the act that has been carried out. This same characteristic is to be seen in the savage’s attitude towards taboo. It is a
command issued by conscience; any violation of it produces a
fearful sense of guilt which follows as a matter of course and of
which the origin is unknown.2
Thus it seems probable that conscience too arose, on a basis of
emotional ambivalence, from quite speciﬁc human relations to
which this ambivalence was attached; and that it arose under the
conditions which we have shown to apply in the case of taboo
1

[E.g. the French ‘conscience’, which has both meanings. The German word for
‘conscience’ is ‘Gewissen’, which contains the same root as such words as ‘wissen’,
‘to know’, and ‘bewusst’, ‘conscious’, as well as the word actually used for
comparison in this paragraph and the next, ‘gewiss’, ‘certain’ or ‘know with
certainty’.]
2
The sense of guilt in the case of taboos is not in the least diminished if the
violation occurs unwittingly. (Cf. the instances above [p. 42 f.].) An interesting
parallel is found in Greek mythology: the guilt of Œdipus was not palliated by
the fact that he incurred it without his knowledge and even against his
intention.

79

80

totem and taboo

and of obsessional neurosis—namely, that one of the opposing
feelings involved shall be unconscious and kept under repression
by the compulsive domination of the other one. This conclusion
is supported by several things we have learnt from the analysis of
neuroses.
In the ﬁrst place, we have found that a feature in the character
of obsessional neurotics is a scrupulous conscientiousness which
is a symptom reacting against the temptation lurking in their
unconscious. If their illness becomes more acute, they develop a
sense of guilt of the most intense degree. In fact, one may venture to say that if we cannot trace the origin of the sense of guilt
in obsessional neurotics, there can be no hope of our ever tracing
it. This task can be directly achieved in the case of individual
neurotic patients, and we may rely upon reaching a similar
solution by inference in the case of primitive peoples.
In the second place, we cannot help being struck by the fact
that a sense of guilt has about it much of the nature of anxiety:
we could describe it without any misgivings as ‘dread of conscience’. But the anxiety points to unconscious sources. The
psychology of the neuroses has taught us that, if wishful
impulses are repressed, their libido is transformed into anxiety.
And this reminds us that there is something unknown and
unconscious in connection with the sense of guilt, namely the
reasons for the act of repudiation. The character of anxiety that is
inherent in the sense of guilt corresponds to this unknown
factor.1
Since taboos are mainly expressed in prohibitions, the underlying presence of a positive current of desire may occur to us as
something quite obvious and calling for no lengthy proofs based
on the analogy of the neuroses. For, after all, there is no need to
1

[It is to be remarked that Freud’s views on the origin and nature both of
conscience and of anxiety were greatly modiﬁed in his later writings. For these
later views see Lectures 31 and 32 in his New Introductory Lectures (1933).]

taboo and emotional ambivalence

prohibit something that no one desires to do, and a thing that is
forbidden with the greatest emphasis must be a thing that is
desired. If we were to apply this plausible thesis to our primitive
peoples, we should be led to the conclusion that some of their
strongest temptations were to kill their kings and priests, to
commit incest, to maltreat the dead, and so on—which seems
scarcely probable. And we should be met with the most positive
contradiction if we were to apply the same thesis to instances in
which we ourselves seem most clearly to hear the voice of conscience. We should maintain with the most absolute certainty
that we feel not the slightest temptation to violate any of these
prohibitions—the commandment to ‘do no murder’, for
instance—and that we feel nothing but horror at the notion of
violating them.
If, however, we were to admit the claims thus asserted by our
conscience, it would follow, on the one hand, that these prohibitions would be superﬂuous—both taboo and our own moral
prohibitions—and, on the other hand, the fact of conscience
would remain unexplained and no place would be left for the
relations between conscience, taboo and neurosis. In other
words, we should be back in the state of knowledge we were in
before we approached the problem from the psycho-analytic
angle.
Suppose, on the other hand, that we were to take into account
the ﬁnding arrived at by psycho-analysis from the dreams of
normal people, to the eﬀect that we ourselves are subject, more
strongly and more often than we suspect, to a temptation to kill
someone and that that temptation produces psychical eﬀects
even though it remains out of sight of our consciousness.
Suppose, again, that we were to recognize the compulsive observances of certain neurotics as being guarantees against an intensiﬁed impulse to murder or as being self-punishments on
account of it. In that case we should have to attach still greater
importance to our thesis that where there is a prohibition there

81

82

totem and taboo

must be an underlying desire. We should have to suppose that
the desire to murder is actually present in the unconscious and
that neither taboos nor moral prohibitions are psychologically
superﬂuous but that on the contrary they are explained and
justiﬁed by the existence of an ambivalent attitude towards the
impulse to murder.
One of the characteristics of this ambivalent relation which I
have repeatedly stressed as fundamental—the fact that the positive current of desire is an unconscious one—opens the way to
further considerations and to further possible explanations.
Psychical processes in the unconscious are not in every respect
identical with those with which our conscious mind is familiar;
they enjoy some remarkable liberties that are forbidden to the
latter. An unconscious impulse need not have arisen at the point
where it makes its appearance; it may arise from some quite
other region and have applied originally to quite other persons
and connections; it may have reached the place at which it
attracts our attention through the mechanism of ‘displacement’.
Owing, moreover, to the indestructibility and insusceptibility to
correction which are attributes of unconscious processes, it may
have survived from very early times to which it was appropriate
into later times and circumstances in which its manifestations
are bound to seem strange. These are no more than hints, but if
they were attentively developed their importance for our understanding of the growth of civilization would become apparent.
Before I conclude this discussion, a further point must not be
overlooked which will pave the way for later inquiries. In maintaining the essential similarity between taboo prohibitions and
moral prohibitions, I have not sought to dispute the fact that
there must be a psychological diﬀerence between them. The
only possible reason why the prohibitions no longer take the
form of taboos must be some change in the circumstances
governing the ambivalence underlying them.

taboo and emotional ambivalence

In our analytical examination of the problems of taboo we
have hitherto allowed ourselves to be led by the points of agreement that we have been able to show between it and obsessional
neurosis. But after all taboo is not a neurosis but a social institution. We are therefore faced with the task of explaining what
diﬀerence there is in principle between a neurosis and a cultural
creation such as taboo.
Once again I will take a single fact as my starting-point. It is
feared among primitive peoples that the violation of a taboo will
be followed by a punishment, as a rule by some serious illness or
by death. The punishment threatens to fall on whoever was
responsible for violating the taboo. In obsessional neuroses the
case is diﬀerent. What the patient fears if he performs some
forbidden action is that a punishment will fall not on himself but
on someone else. This person’s identity is as a rule left unstated,
but can usually be shown without diﬃculty by analysis to be one
of those closest and most dear to the patient. Here, then, the
neurotic seems to be behaving altruistically and the primitive
man egoistically. Only if the violation of a taboo is not automatically avenged upon the wrong-doer does a collective feeling
arise among savages that they are all threatened by the outrage;
and they thereupon hasten to carry out the omitted punishment
themselves. There is no diﬃculty in explaining the mechanism
of this solidarity. What is in question is fear of an infectious
example, of the temptation to imitate—that is, of the contagious
character of taboo. If one person succeeds in gratifying the
repressed desire, the same desire is bound to be kindled in all the
other members of the community. In order to keep the temptation down, the envied transgressor must be deprived of the fruit
of his enterprise; and the punishment will not infrequently give
those who carry it out an opportunity of committing the same
outrage under colour of an act of expiation. This is indeed one of
the foundations of the human penal system and it is based, no
doubt correctly, on the assumption that the prohibited impulses

83

84

totem and taboo

are present alike in the criminal and in the avenging community.
In this, psycho-analysis is no more than conﬁrming the habitual
pronouncement of the pious: we are all miserable sinners.
How, then, are we to account for the unexpected nobility of
mind of the neurotic, who fears nothing on his own account but
everything for someone he loves? Analytical inquiry shows that
this attitude is not primary. Originally, that is to say at the
beginning of the illness, the threat of punishment applied, as in
the case of savages, to the patient himself; he was invariably in
fear for his own life; it was not until later that the mortal fear was
displaced on to another and a loved person. The process is a little
complicated, but we can follow it perfectly. At the root of the
prohibition there is invariably a hostile impulse against someone
the patient loves—a wish that that person should die. This
impulse is repressed by a prohibition and the prohibition is
attached to some particular act, which, by displacement, represents, it may be, a hostile act against the loved person. There is a
threat of death if this act is performed. But the process goes
further, and the original wish that the loved person may die is
replaced by a fear that he may die. So that when the neurosis
appears to be so tenderly altruistic, it is merely compensating for an
underlying contrary attitude of brutal egoism. We may describe
as ‘social’ the emotions which are determined by showing
consideration for another person without taking him as a
[direct] sexual object. The receding into the background of
these social factors may be stressed as a fundamental characteristic of the neurosis, though one which is later disguised
by overcompensation.
I do not propose to linger over the origin of these social
impulses and their relation to the other basic human instincts
but shall proceed to illustrate the second main characteristic of
the neurosis by means of another example. In the forms which it
assumes, taboo very closely resembles the neurotic’s fear of
touching, his ‘touching phobia’. Now, in the case of the neurosis

taboo and emotional ambivalence

the prohibition invariably relates to touching of a sexual kind, and
psycho-analysis has shown that it is in general true that the
instinctual forces that are diverted and displaced in neuroses
have a sexual origin. In the case of taboo the prohibited touching
is obviously not to be understood in an exclusively sexual sense
but in the more general sense of attacking, of getting control,
and of asserting oneself. If there is a prohibition against touching
a chief or anything that has been in contact with him, this means
that an inhibition is to be laid on the same impulse which
expresses itself on other occasions in keeping a suspicious watch
upon the chief or even in ill-treating him physically before his
coronation. (See above [p. 58].) Thus the fact which is characteristic of the neurosis is the preponderance of the sexual over the
social instinctual elements.1 The social instincts, however, are
themselves derived from a combination of egoistic and erotic
components into wholes of a special kind.
This single comparison between taboo and obsessional neurosis is enough to enable us to gather the nature of the relation
between the diﬀerent forms of neurosis and cultural institutions,
and to see how it is that the study of the psychology of the
neuroses is important for an understanding of the growth of
civilization.
The neuroses exhibit on the one hand striking and far-reaching
points of agreement with those great social institutions, art,
religion and philosophy. But on the other hand they seem like
distortions of them. It might be maintained that a case of hysteria is a caricature of a work of art, that an obsessional neurosis
is a caricature of a religion and that a paranoic delusion is a
caricature of a philosophical system. The divergence resolves
itself ultimately into the fact that the neuroses are social structures; they endeavour to achieve by private means what is
eﬀected in society by collective eﬀort. If we analyse the instincts
1

[This sentence is in spaced type in the original.]

85

86

totem and taboo

at work in the neuroses, we ﬁnd that the determining inﬂuence
in them is exercised by instinctual forces of sexual origin; the
corresponding cultural formations, on the other hand, are based
upon social instincts, originating from the combination of egoistic and erotic elements. Sexual needs are not capable of uniting
men in the same way as are the demands of self-preservation.
Sexual satisfaction is essentially the private aﬀair of each
individual.
The asocial nature of neuroses has its genetic origin in their
most fundamental purpose, which is to take ﬂight from an
unsatisfying reality into a more pleasurable world of phantasy.
The real world, which is avoided in this way by neurotics, is
under the sway of human society and of the institutions collectively created by it. To turn away from reality is at the same time
to withdraw from the community of man.

3
ANIMISM, MAGIC AND
THE OMNIPOTENCE
OF THOUGHTS
(1)
Writings that seek to apply the ﬁndings of psycho-analysis to
topics in the ﬁeld of the mental sciences have the inevitable
defect of oﬀering too little to readers of both classes. Such writings can only be in the nature of an instigation: they put before
the specialist certain suggestions for him to take into account in
his own work. This defect is bound to be extremely evident in an
essay which will attempt to deal with the immense domain of
what is known as ‘animism’.1
Animism is, in its narrower sense, the doctrine of souls, and,
1

The necessity for a concise treatment of the material involves the omission of
any elaborate bibliography. Instead, I will merely refer to the standard works of
Herbert Spencer, J. G. Frazer, Andrew Lang, E. B. Tylor and Wilhelm Wundt,
from which all that I have to say about animism and magic is derived. My own
contribution is visible only in my selection both of material and of opinions.

88

totem and taboo

in its wider sense, the doctrine of spiritual beings in general. The
term ‘animatism’ has also been used to denote the theory of the
living character of what appear to us to be inanimate objects [see
below, p. 107], and the terms ‘animalism’ and ‘manism’ occur as
well in this connection. The word ‘animism’, originally used to
describe a particular philosophical system, seems to have been
given its present meaning by Tylor.1
What led to the introduction of these terms was a realization
of the highly remarkable view of nature and the universe
adopted by the primitive races of whom we have knowledge,
whether in past history or at the present time. They people the
world with innumerable spiritual beings both benevolent and
malignant; and these spirits and demons they regard as the
causes of natural phenomena and they believe that not only animals and plants but all the inanimate objects in the world are
animated by them. A third, and perhaps the most important,
article of this primitive ‘philosophy of nature’2 strikes us as less
strange, since, while we have retained only a very limited belief
in the existence of spirits and explain natural phenomena by the
agency of impersonal physical forces, we ourselves are not very
far removed from this third belief. For primitive peoples believe
that human individuals are inhabited by similar spirits. These
souls which live in human beings can leave their habitations and
migrate into other human beings; they are the vehicle of mental
activities and are to a certain extent independent of their bodies.
Originally souls were pictured as very similar to persons and
only in the course of a long development have they lost their
material characteristics and become to a high degree
‘spiritualized’.3
1

Cf. Tylor (1891, 1, 425), Wundt (1906 [142 f. and] 173) [and Marett
(1900, 171)].
2
[‘Naturphilosophie’, the pantheistic philosophy of Schelling.]
3
Wundt (1906), Chapter IV, ‘Die Seelenvorstellungen’.

animism, magic and the omnipotence of thoughts

Most authorities incline to the view that these ideas of a soul
are the original nucleus of the animistic system, that spirits are
only souls that have made themselves independent, and that the
souls of animals, plants and objects were constructed on the
analogy of human souls.
How did primitive men arrive at the peculiar dualistic views
on which the animistic system is based? It is supposed that they
did so by observing the phenomena of sleep (including dreams)
and of death which so much resembles it, and by attempting to
explain those states, which are of such close concern to everyone. The chief starting-point of this theorizing must have been
the problem of death. What primitive man regarded as the natural thing was the indeﬁnite prolongation of life—immortality.
The idea of death was only accepted late, and with hesitancy.
Even for us it is lacking in content and has no clear connotation.
There have been very lively but inconclusive discussions upon
the part that may have been played in the formation of the basic
doctrines of animism by such other observed or experienced
facts as dream-pictures, shadows, mirror images, and so on.1
It has been regarded as perfectly natural and not in the least
puzzling that primitive man should have reacted to the phenomena which aroused his speculations by forming the idea of the
soul and then of extending it to objects in the external world. In
discussing the fact that the same animistic ideas have emerged
among the most various races and at every period, Wundt
(1906, 154) declares that ‘they are the necessary psychological
product of a mythopœic consciousness . . . and in this sense,
therefore, primitive animism must be regarded as the spiritual
expression of the natural state of man, so far as it is accessible to
our observation’. The justiﬁcation for attributing life to
inanimate objects was already stated by Hume in his Natural
1

Cf. Wundt [loc. cit.], Herbert Spencer [1893, Part I], as well as the general
articles in the Encyclopaedia Britannica (1910–11) on ‘Animism’, ‘Mythology’, etc.

89

90

totem and taboo

History of Religion [Section III]: ‘There is an universal tendency
among mankind to conceive all beings like themselves, and to
transfer to every object those qualities with which they are familiarly acquainted, and of which they are intimately conscious.’1
Animism is a system of thought. It does not merely give an
explanation of a particular phenomenon, but allows us to grasp
the whole universe as a single unity from a single point of view.
The human race, if we are to follow the authorities, have in the
course of ages developed three such systems of thought—three
great pictures of the universe: animistic (or mythological),
religious and scientiﬁc. Of these, animism, the ﬁrst to be created,
is perhaps the one which is most consistent and exhaustive and
which gives a truly complete explanation of the nature of the
universe. This ﬁrst human Weltanschauung is a psychological theory. It
would go beyond our present purpose to show how much of it
still persists in modern life, either in the debased form of superstition or as the living basis of our speech, our beliefs and our
philosophies.
With these three stages in mind, it may be said that animism
itself is not yet a religion but contains the foundations on which
religions are later built. It is obvious, too, that myths are based
on animistic premises, though the details of the relation between
myths and animism seem to be unexplained in some essential
respects.

(2)
Our psycho-analytic approach to the subject, however, is from
another side. It is not to be supposed that men were inspired to
create their ﬁrst system of the universe by pure speculative curiosity. The practical need for controlling the world around them
must have played its part. So we are not surprised to learn that,
1

Quoted by Tylor (1891, 1, 477).

animism, magic and the omnipotence of thoughts

hand in hand with the animistic system, there went a body of
instructions upon how to obtain mastery over men, beasts and
things—or rather, over their spirits. These instructions go by the
names of ‘sorcery’ and ‘magic’.1 Reinach (1905–12, 2, xv)
describes them as the ‘strategy of animism’; I should prefer,
following Hubert and Mauss (1904 [142 ﬀ.]), to regard them as
its technique.
Can the concepts of sorcery and magic be distinguished?
Perhaps—if we are prepared to show a somewhat arbitrary disregard for the ﬂuctuations of linguistic usage. Sorcery, then, is
essentially the art of inﬂuencing spirits by treating them in the
same way as one would treat men in like circumstances: appeasing them, making amends to them, propitiating them, intimidating them, robbing them of their power, subduing them to one’s
will—by the same methods that have proved eﬀective with
living men. Magic, on the other hand, is something diﬀerent:
fundamentally, it disregards spirits and makes use of special procedures and not of everyday psychological methods. It is easy to
guess that magic is the earlier and more important branch of
animistic technique; for magical methods can, among others, be
used in dealing with spirits,2 and magic can be applied as well in
cases where, as it seems to us, the process of spiritualizing
Nature has not yet been carried out.
Magic has to serve the most varied purposes—it must subject
natural phenomena to the will of man, it must protect the
individual from his enemies and from dangers and it must give
him power to injure his enemies. But the principle on the
presumption of which magical action is based—or, more
properly, the principle of magic—is so striking that none of the
1

[’Zauberei’ and ‘Magie’ in the original.]
If a spirit is scared away by making a noise and shouting, the action is one
purely of sorcery; if compulsion is applied to it by getting hold of its name,
magic has been used against it.
2

91

92

totem and taboo

authorities has failed to recognize it. Tylor [1891, 1, 116], if
we leave on one side an accompanying moral judgment, states
it in its most succinct form as mistaking an ideal connection for
a real one. I will illustrate this feature from two groups of
magical acts.
One of the most widespread magical procedures for injuring
an enemy is by making an eﬃgy of him from any convenient
material. Whether the eﬃgy resembles him is of little account:
any object can be ‘made into’ an eﬃgy of him. Whatever is
then done to the eﬃgy, the same thing happens to the
detested original; whatever part of the former’s body is damaged, the same part of the latter’s becomes diseased. The same
magical technique may be employed, not only for purposes of
private enmity, but also for pious ends and for giving help to
gods against malignant demons. I will quote from Frazer
(1911a, 1, 67): ‘Every night when the sun-god Ra sank down
to his home in the glowing west he was assailed by hosts of
demons under the leadership of the arch-ﬁend Apepi. All night
long he fought them, and sometimes by day the powers of
darkness sent up clouds even into the blue Egyptian sky to
obscure his light and weaken his power. To aid the sun-god in
this daily struggle, a ceremony was daily performed in his
temple at Thebes. A ﬁgure of his foe Apepi, represented as a
crocodile with a hideous face or a serpent with many coils,
was made of wax, and on it the demon’s name was written in
green ink. Wrapt in a papyrus case, on which another likeness
of Apepi had been drawn in green ink, the ﬁgure was then
tied up with black hair, spat upon, hacked with a stone knife,
and cast on the ground. There the priest trod on it with his
left foot again and again, and then burnt it in a ﬁre made of a
certain plant or grass. When Apepi himself had thus been
eﬀectually disposed of, waxen eﬃgies of each of his principal
demons, and of their fathers, mothers and children, were

animism, magic and the omnipotence of thoughts

made and burnt in the same way. The service, accompanied by
the recitation of certain prescribed spells, was repeated not
merely morning, noon and night, but whenever a storm was
raging, or heavy rain had set in, or black clouds were stealing
across the sky to hide the sun’s bright disc. The ﬁends of
darkness, clouds, and rain felt the injuries inﬂicted on their
images as if they had been done to themselves; they passed
away, at least for a time, and the beneﬁcent sun-god shone out
triumphant once more.’1
From the vast number of magical acts having a similar basis I
will only draw attention to two more, which have played a large
part among primitive peoples of every age and which persist to
some degree in the myths and cults of higher stages of
civilization—that is, rituals for producing rain and fertility. Rain
is produced magically by imitating it or the clouds and storms
which give rise to it, by ‘playing at rain’, one might almost say.
In Japan, for instance, ‘a party of Ainos will scatter water by
means of sieves, while others will take a porringer, ﬁt it up with
sails and oars as if it were a boat, and then push or draw it
about the village and gardens’.2 In the same way, the fertility of
the earth is magically promoted by a dramatic representation of
human intercourse. Thus, to take one from a countless number
of instances, ‘in some parts of Java, at the season when the
bloom will soon be on the rice, the husbandman and his wife
visit their ﬁelds by night and there engage in sexual intercourse’ to encourage the fertility of the rice by their example.3
There is a dread, however, that prohibited, incestuous sexual
1

It seems probable that the biblical prohibition against making an image of any
living thing originated, not from any objection to the plastic arts, but from a
desire to deprive magic (which was abominated by the Hebrew religion) of
one of its tools. Cf. Frazer (1911a, 1, 87 n.).
2
[Frazer (1911a, 1, 251), quoting Batchelor (1901, 333).]
3
Frazer (1911a, 2, 98) [quoting Wilken (1884, 958)].

93

94

totem and taboo

relations may cause a failure of the crops and make the earth
sterile.’1
Certain negative observances, that is, magical precautions,
must be included in this ﬁrst group. ‘When a Dyak village has
turned out to hunt wild pigs in the jungle, the people who stay
at home may not touch oil or water with their hands during the
absence of their friends; for if they did so, the hunters would all
be “butter-ﬁngered” and the prey would slip through their
hands.’2 Or again, ‘while a Gilyak hunter is pursuing game in
the forest, his children at home are forbidden to make drawings
on wood or on sand; for they fear that if the children did so, the
paths in the forest would become as perplexed as the lines in the
drawings, so that the hunter might lose his way and never
return.’3
In these last, as in so many other instances of the workings of
magic, the element of distance is disregarded; in other words,
telepathy is taken for granted. We shall ﬁnd no diﬃculty,
therefore, in understanding this characteristic of magic.
There can be no doubt what is to be regarded as the operative
factor in all these examples. It is the similarity between the act
performed and the result expected. For this reason Frazer
describes this sort of magic as ‘imitative’ or ‘homœopathic’. If I
wish it to rain, I have only to do something that looks like rain or
is reminiscent of rain. At a later stage of civilization, instead of
this rain-magic, processions will be made to a temple and
prayers for rain will be addressed to the deity living in it. Finally,
this religious technique will in its turn be given up and attempts
will be made to produce eﬀects in the atmosphere which will
lead to rain.
*
1

An echo of this is to be found in the Œdipus Rex of Sophocles [e.g. in the
prologue and ﬁrst Chorus].
2
Frazer (1911a, 1, 120) [quoting Roth (1896, 1, 430)].
3
Frazer (1911a, 1, 122) [quoting Labbé (1903, 268)].

animism, magic and the omnipotence of thoughts

In a second group of magical acts the principle of similarity
plays no part, and its place is taken by another one, the nature of
which will at once become clear from the following examples.
There is another procedure by which an enemy can be
injured. One gets possession of some of his hair or nails or other
waste products or even a piece of his clothing, and treats them in
some hostile way. It is then exactly as though one had got possession of the man himself; and he himself experiences whatever
it is that has been done to the objects that originated from him.
In the view of primitive man, one of the most important parts of
a person is his name. So that if one knows the name of a man or
of a spirit, one has obtained a certain amount of power over the
owner of the name. This is the origin of the remarkable precautions and restrictions in the use of names which we have already
touched upon in the essay on taboo. (See p. 63 ﬀ.) In these
examples the place of similarity is evidently taken by aﬃnity.
The higher motives for cannibalism among primitive races
have a similar origin. By incorporating parts of a person’s body
through the act of eating, one at the same time acquires the
qualities possessed by him. This leads in certain circumstances to
precautions and restrictions in regard to diet. A woman who is
with child will avoid eating the ﬂesh of certain animals for fear
that any undesirable qualities they may have (cowardice, for
instance) might be passed over to the child that is nourished by
her. The magical power is not aﬀected even if the connection
between the two objects has already been severed or even if the
contact occurred only on a single important occasion. For
instance, the belief that there is a magical bond between a
wound and the weapon which caused it may be traced unaltered
for thousands of years. If a Melanesian can obtain possession of
the bow which caused his wound, he will keep it carefully in a
cool place so as to reduce the inﬂammation of the wound. But if
the bow was left in the enemy’s possession, it will undoubtedly
be hung up close to the ﬁre so that the wound may become

95

96

totem and taboo

thoroughly hot and inﬂamed.1 Pliny (in his Natural History, Book
xxviii [Chapter 7]) tells us that ‘if you have wounded a man and
are sorry for it, you have only to spit on the hand that gave the
wound, and the pain of the suﬀerer will be instantly alleviated’.
[Frazer, loc. cit.] So, too, Francis Bacon (in his Sylva Sylvarum [X,
§ 998]) mentions that ‘it is constantly received and avouched
that the anointing of the weapon that maketh the wound will
heal the wound itself ’. English country people are said even
today to follow this prescription, and if they cut themselves with
a scythe carefully keep the instrument clean, to prevent the
wound from festering. ‘At Norwich in June 1902 a woman
named Matilda Henry accidentally ran a nail into her foot. Without examining the wound, or even removing her stocking, she
caused her daughter to grease the nail, saying that if this were
done no harm would come of the hurt. A few days afterwards
she died of lockjaw’—as a result of this displaced antisepsis.
(Frazer, ibid., 203.)
The last group of instances exemplify what Frazer distinguishes from ‘imitative’ magic under the name of ‘contagious’ magic. What is believed to be their eﬀective principle is
no longer similarity but spacial connection, contiguity, or at
least imagined contiguity—the recollection of it. Since, however,
similarity and contiguity are the two essential principles of processes of association, it appears that the true explanation of all
the folly of magical observances is the domination of the association of ideas. The aptness of Tylor’s description of magic which
I have already quoted [p. 79] now becomes evident: mistaking
an ideal connection for a real one. Frazer (1911a, 1, 420) has put
it almost in the same words: ‘Men mistook the order of their
ideas for the order of nature, and hence imagined that the
control which they have, or seem to have, over their thoughts,
1

[Frazer (1911a, 1, 201), quoting Codrington (1891, 310).]

animism, magic and the omnipotence of thoughts

permitted them to exercise a corresponding control over
things.’
We shall at ﬁrst be surprised to learn that this illuminating
explanation of magic has been rejected by some writers as
unsatisfactory (e.g. Thomas, 1910–11a). On reﬂection, however,
it will be seen that the criticism is justiﬁed. The associative
theory of magic merely explains the paths along which magic
proceeds; it does not explain its true essence, namely the misunderstanding which leads it to replace the laws of nature by
psychological ones. Some dynamic factor is evidently missing.
But whereas the critics of Frazer’s theory have gone astray in
their search for it, it will be easy to arrive at a satisfactory explanation of magic merely by carrying the associative theory further
and deeper.
Let us consider ﬁrst the simpler and more important case of
imitative magic. According to Frazer (1911a, 1, 54) it can be
practised by itself, whereas contagious magic as a rule presupposes the other. It is easy to perceive the motives which lead
men to practise magic: they are human wishes. All we need to
suppose is that primitive man had an immense belief in the
power of his wishes. The basic reason why what he sets about
by magical means comes to pass is, after all, simply that he
wills it. To begin with, therefore, the emphasis is only upon his
wish.
Children are in an analogous psychical situation, though their
motor eﬃciency is still undeveloped. I have elsewhere (1911a)
put forward the hypothesis that, to begin with, they satisfy their
wishes in an hallucinatory manner, that is, they create a satisfying situation by means of centrifugal excitations of their sense
organs. An adult primitive man has an alternative method open
to him. His wishes are accompanied by a motor impulse, the
will, which is later destined to alter the whole face of the earth in
order to satisfy his wishes. This motor impulse is at ﬁrst
employed to give a representation of the satisfying situation in

97

98

totem and taboo

such a way that it becomes possible to experience the satisfaction
by means of what might be described as motor hallucinations.
This kind of representation of a satisﬁed wish is quite comparable to children’s play, which succeeds their earlier purely sensory technique of satisfaction. If children and primitive men ﬁnd
play and imitative representation enough for them, that is not a
sign of their being unassuming in our sense or of their resignedly accepting their actual impotence. It is the easily understandable result of the paramount virtue they ascribe to their wishes,
of the will that is associated with those wishes and of the
methods by which those wishes operate. As time goes on, the
psychological accent shifts from the motives for the magical act on
to the measures by which it is carried out—that is, on to the act
itself. (It would perhaps be more correct to say that it is only
these measures that reveal to the subject the excessive valuation
which he attaches to his psychical acts.) It thus comes to appear
as though it is the magical act itself which, owing to its similarity with the desired result, alone determines the occurrence of
that result. There is no opportunity, at the stage of animistic
thinking, for showing any objective evidence of the true state of
aﬀairs. But a possibility of doing so does arrive at a later time,
when, though all of these procedures are still being carried out,
the psychical phenomenon of doubt has begun to emerge as an
expression of a tendency to repression. At that point, men will
be ready to admit that conjuring up spirits has no result unless it
is accompanied by faith, and that the magical power of prayer
fails if there is no piety at work behind it.1
The fact that it has been possible to construct a system of
contagious magic on associations of contiguity shows that the
importance attached to wishes and to the will has been extended
1

Cf. the King in Hamlet (. 3):
‘My words ﬂy up, my thoughts remain below:
Words without thoughts never to heaven go.’

animism, magic and the omnipotence of thoughts

from them on to all those psychical acts which are subject to
the will. A general over-valuation has thus come about of all
mental processes—an attitude towards the world, that is,
which, in view of our knowledge of the relation between reality and thought, cannot fail to strike us as an over-valuation of
the latter. Things become less important than ideas of things:
whatever is done to the latter will inevitably also occur to the
former. Relations which hold between the ideas of things are
assumed to hold equally between the things themselves. Since
distance is of no importance in thinking—since what lies furthest apart both in time and space can without diﬃculty be
comprehended in a single act of consciousness—so, too, the
world of magic has a telepathic disregard for spacial distance
and treats past situations as though they were present. In the
animistic epoch the reﬂection of the internal world is bound to
blot out the other picture of the world—the one which we seem
to perceive.
It is further to be noticed that the two principles of
association—similarity and contiguity—are both included in
the more comprehensive concept of ‘contact’. Association by
contiguity is contact in the literal sense; association by similarity
is contact in the metaphorical sense. The use of the same word
for the two kinds of relation is no doubt accounted for by some
identity in the psychical processes concerned which we have not
yet grasped. We have here the same range of meaning of the idea
of ‘contact’ as we found in our analysis of taboo.1
By way of summary, then, it may be said that the principle
governing magic, the technique of the animistic mode of
thinking, is the principle of the ‘omnipotence of thoughts’.

1

Cf. the second essay in this volume [p. 32].

99

100 totem and taboo

(3)
I have adopted the term ‘omnipotence of thoughts’ from a
highly intelligent man who suﬀered from obsessional ideas and
who, after having been set right by psycho-analytical treatment,
was able to give evidence of his eﬃciency and good sense. (Cf.
Freud, 1909b.) He had coined the phrase as an explanation of all
the strange and uncanny events by which he, like others
aﬄicted with the same illness, seemed to be pursued. If he
thought of someone, he would be sure to meet that very person
immediately afterwards, as though by magic. If he suddenly
asked after the health of an acquaintance whom he had not seen
for a long time, he would hear that he had just died, so that it
would look as though a telepathic message had arrived from
him. If, without any really serious intention, he swore at some
stranger, he might be sure that the man would die soon afterwards, so that he would feel responsible for his death. In the
course of the treatment he himself was able to tell me how the
deceptive appearance arose in most of these cases, and by what
contrivances he himself had helped to strengthen his own superstitious beliefs. All obsessional neurotics are superstitious in this
way, usually against their better judgment.1
It is in obsessional neuroses that the survival of the omnipotence of thoughts is most clearly visible and that the consequences of this primitive mode of thinking come closest to
consciousness. But we must not be misled into supposing that it
is a distinguishing feature of this particular neurosis, for analytic
investigation reveals the same thing in the other neuroses as well.
In all of them what determines the formation of symptoms is the
1

We appear to attribute an ‘uncanny’ quality to impressions that seek to
conﬁrm the omnipotence of thoughts and the animistic mode of thinking in
general, after we have reached a stage at which, in our judgment, we have
abandoned such beliefs. [Cf. Freud’s subsequent paper on ‘The Uncanny’
(1919).]

animism, magic and the omnipotence of thoughts

reality not of experience but of thought. Neurotics live in a
world apart, where, as I have said elsewhere [1911a, English
translation, 20], only ‘neurotic currency’ is legal tender; that is
to say, they are only aﬀected by what is thought with intensity
and pictured with emotion, whereas agreement with external
reality is a matter of no importance. What hysterics repeat in
their attacks and ﬁx by means of their symptoms are experiences
which have occurred in that form only in their imagination—
though it is true that in the last resort those imagined experiences go back to actual events or are based upon them. To
attribute the neurotic sense of guilt to real misdeeds would
show an equal misunderstanding. An obsessional neurotic may
be weighed down by a sense of guilt that would be appropriate in a mass-murderer, while in fact, from his childhood
onwards, he has behaved to his fellow-men as the most considerate and scrupulous member of society. Nevertheless, his
sense of guilt has a justiﬁcation: it is founded on the intense
and frequent death-wishes against his fellows which are
unconsciously at work in him. It has a justiﬁcation if what we
take into account are unconscious thoughts and not intentional
deeds. Thus the omnipotence of thoughts, the over-valuation
of mental processes as compared with reality, is seen to have
unrestricted play in the emotional life of neurotic patients and
in everything that derives from it. If one of them undergoes
psycho-analytic treatment, which makes what is unconscious
in him conscious, he will be unable to believe that thoughts
are free and will constantly be afraid of expressing evil wishes,
as though their expression would lead inevitably to their fulﬁlment. This behaviour, as well as the superstitions which he
practises in ordinary life, reveals his resemblance to the savages
who believe they can alter the external world by mere
thinking.
The primary obsessive acts of these neurotics are of an entirely
magical character. If they are not charms, they are at all events

101

102 totem and taboo
counter-charms, designed to ward oﬀ the expectations of
disaster with which the neurosis usually starts. Whenever I have
succeeded in penetrating the mystery, I have found that the
expected disaster was death. Schopenhauer has said that the
problem of death stands at the outset of every philosophy; and
we have already seen [p. 65] that the origin of the belief in souls
and in demons, which is the essence of animism, goes back to
the impression which is made upon men by death. It is diﬃcult
to judge whether the obsessive or protective acts performed by
obsessional neurotics follow the law of similarity (or, as the case
may be, of contrast); for as a rule, owing to the prevailing
conditions of the neurosis, they have been distorted by being
displaced on to some detail, on to some action which is in
itself of the greatest triviality.1 The protective formulas of
obsessional neuroses, too, have their counterpart in the formulas of magic. It is possible, however, to describe the course of
development of obsessive acts: we can show how they begin by
being as remote as possible from anything sexual—magical
defences against evil wishes—and how they end by being substitutes for the forbidden sexual act and the closest possible
imitations of it.
If we are prepared to accept the account given above of the
evolution of human views of the universe—an animistic phase
followed by a religious phase and this in turn by a scientiﬁc
one—it will not be diﬃcult to follow the vicissitudes of the
‘omnipotence of thoughts’ through these diﬀerent phases. At
the animistic stage men ascribe omnipotence to themselves. At the
religious stage they transfer it to the gods but do not seriously
abandon it themselves, for they reserve the power of
inﬂuencing the gods in a variety of ways according to their
1

A further motive for such displacement on to a trivial action will appear in
what follows.

animism, magic and the omnipotence of thoughts

wishes. The scientiﬁc view of the universe no longer aﬀords any
room for human omnipotence; men have acknowledged their
smallness and submitted resignedly to death and to the other
necessities of nature. None the less some of the primitive belief
in omnipotence still survives in men’s faith in the power
of the human mind, taking account, as it does, of the laws of
reality.
If we trace back the development of libidinal trends as we ﬁnd
them in the individual from their adult forms to the ﬁrst beginnings in childhood, an important distinction emerges, which I
have described in my Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905a).
Manifestations of the sexual instincts can be observed from the
very ﬁrst, but to begin with they are not yet directed towards any
external object. The separate instinctual components of sexuality
work independently of one another to obtain pleasure and ﬁnd
satisfaction in the subject’s own body. This stage is known as that
of auto-erotism and it is succeeded by one in which an object is
chosen.
Further study has shown that it is expedient and indeed
indispensable to insert a third stage between these two, or, putting it in another way, to divide the ﬁrst stage, that of autoerotism, into two. At this intermediate stage, the importance of
which is being made more and more evident by research, the
hitherto isolated sexual instincts have already come together into
a single whole and have also found an object. But this object is
not an external one, extraneous to the subject, but it is his own
ego, which has been constituted at about this same time. Bearing
in mind pathological ﬁxations of this new stage, which become
observable later, we have given it the name of ‘narcissism’. The
subject behaves as though he were in love with himself; his
egoistic instincts and his libidinal wishes are not yet separable
under our analysis.
Although we are not yet in a position to describe with sufﬁcient accuracy the characteristics of this narcissistic stage, at

103

104 totem and taboo
which the hitherto dissociated sexual instincts come together
into a single unity and cathect1 the ego as an object, we suspect
already that this narcissistic organization is never wholly abandoned. A human being remains to some extent narcissistic even
after he has found external objects for his libido. The cathexes of
objects which he eﬀects are as it were emanations of the libido
that still remains in his ego and can be drawn back into it once
more. The state of being in love, which is psychologically so
remarkable and is the normal prototype of the psychoses, shows
these emanations at their maximum compared to the level of
self-love.
Primitive men and neurotics, as we have seen, attach a high
valuation—in our eyes an over-valuation—to psychical acts.
This attitude may plausibly be brought into relation with narcissism and regarded as an essential component of it. It may
be said that in primitive men the process of thinking is still to
a great extent sexualized. This is the origin of their belief in
the omnipotence of thoughts, their unshakable conﬁdence in
the possibility of controlling the world and their inaccessibility to the experiences, so easily obtainable, which could
teach them man’s true position in the universe. As regards
neurotics, we ﬁnd that on the one hand a considerable part of
this primitive attitude has survived in their constitution, and
on the other hand that the sexual repression that has occurred
in them has brought about a further sexualization of their
thinking processes. The psychological results must be the
same in both cases, whether the libidinal hypercathexis of
thinking is an original one or has been produced by

1

[The words ‘cathexis’ and ‘to cathect’ are used as renderings of the German
‘Besetzung’ and ‘besetzen’. They are the terms with which Freud expresses the idea
of psychical energy being lodged in or attaching itself to mental structures or
processes, somewhat on the analogy of an electric charge.]

animism, magic and the omnipotence of thoughts

regression: intellectual narcissism and the omnipotence of
thoughts.1
If we may regard the existence among primitive races of the
omnipotence of thoughts as evidence in favour of narcissism, we
are encouraged to attempt a comparison between the phases in
the development of men’s view of the universe and the stages of
an individual’s libidinal development. The animistic phase
would correspond to narcissism both chronologically and in its
content; the religious phase would correspond to the stage of
object-choice of which the characteristic is a child’s attachment
to his parents; while the scientiﬁc phase would have an exact
counterpart in the stage at which an individual has reached
maturity, has renounced the pleasure principle, adjusted himself
to reality and turned to the external world for the object of his
desires.2
In only a single ﬁeld of our civilization has the omnipotence
of thoughts been retained, and that is in the ﬁeld of art. Only in
art does it still happen that a man who is consumed by desires
performs something resembling the accomplishment of those
desires and that what he does in play produces emotional
eﬀects—thanks to artistic illusion—just as though it were something real. People speak with justice of the ‘magic of art’ and
compare artists to magicians. But the comparison is perhaps
more signiﬁcant than it claims to be. There can be no doubt that
art did not begin as art for art’s sake. It worked originally in the
service of impulses which are for the most part extinct to-day.
1

‘It is almost an axiom with writers on this subject, that a sort of Solipsism, or
Berkleianism (as Professor Sully terms it as he ﬁnds it in the Child), operates in
the savage to make him refuse to recognize death as a fact.’ (Marett, 1900,
178.)
2
I will only brieﬂy allude here to the fact that the original narcissism of
children has a decisive inﬂuence upon our view of the development of their
character and excludes the possibility of their having any primary sense of
inferiority.

105

106 totem and taboo
And among them we may suspect the presence of many magical
purposes.1

(4)
Thus the ﬁrst picture which man formed of the world—
animism—was a psychological one. It needed no scientiﬁc basis
as yet, since science only begins after it has been realized that the
world is unknown and that means must therefore be sought for
getting to know it. Animism came to primitive man naturally
and as a matter of course. He knew what things were like in the
world, namely just as he felt himself to be. We are thus prepared
to ﬁnd that primitive man transposed the structural conditions
of his own mind2 into the external world; and we may attempt
to reverse the process and put back into the human mind what
animism teaches as to the nature of things.
The technique of animism, magic, reveals in the clearest and
most unmistakable way an intention to impose the laws governing mental life upon real things; in this, spirits need not as yet
1

Cf. Reinach, ‘L’art et la magie’ (1905–12, 1, 125–36). In Reinach’s opinion
the primitive artists who left behind the carvings and paintings of animals in
the French caves, did not desire to ‘please’ but to ‘evoke’ or conjure up. He thus
explains why it is that these pictures are situated in the darkest and most
inaccessible parts of the caves and that dangerous beasts of prey do not appear
among them. ‘Les modernes parlent souvent, par hyperbole, de la magie du
pinceau ou du ciseau d’un grand artiste et, en général, de la magie de l’art.
Entendu au sens propre, qui est celui d’une contrainte mystique exercée par la
volonté de l’homme sur d’autres volontés ou sur les choses, cette expression
n’est plus admissible; mais nous avons vu qu’elle était autrefois rigoureusement vraie, du moins dans l’opinion des artistes.’ (Ibid., 136.) [‘In modern
times people often speak metaphorically of the magic of a great artist’s brush
or chisel, or more generally of the magic of art. This expression is no longer
permissible in its proper sense of a mystical force brought to bear by the
human will upon other wills or upon objects; but, as we have seen, there was a
time when it was literally true—at least in the artists’ opinion.’]
2
Which he was aware of by what is known as endopsychic perception.

animism, magic and the omnipotence of thoughts

play any part, though spirits may be taken as objects of magical
treatment. Thus the assumptions of magic are more fundamental
and older than the doctrine of spirits, which forms the kernel of
animism. Our psycho-analytic point of view coincides here with
a theory put forward by R. R. Marett (1900), who postulates a
pre-animistic stage before animism, the character of which is
best indicated by the term ‘animatism’, the doctrine of the universality of life. Experience has little light to throw on preanimism, since no race has yet been discovered which is without
the concept of spirits. (Cf. Wundt, 1906, 171 ﬀ.)
Whereas magic still reserves omnipotence solely for thoughts,
animism hands some of it over to spirits and so prepares the way
for the construction of a religion. What, we may ask, can have
induced a primitive man to make this ﬁrst act of renunciation? It
can scarcely have been a recognition of the falseness of his premises, for he continued to practise the magical technique.
Spirits and demons, as I have shown in the last essay, are only
projections of man’s own emotional impulses.1 He turns his
emotional cathexes into persons, he peoples the world with
them and meets his internal mental processes again outside
himself—in just the same way as that intelligent paranoiac,
Schreber, found a reﬂection of the attachments and detachments
of his libido in the vicissitudes of his confabulated ‘rays of God’.2
I propose to avoid (as I have already done elsewhere3) entering
into the general problem of the origin of the tendency to project
mental processes into the outside. It is, however, safe to assume
that that tendency will be intensiﬁed when projection promises
to bring with it the advantage of mental relief. Such an advantage
1

I assume that at this early narcissistic stage cathexes arising from libidinal and
from other sources of excitation may still be indistinguishable from one
another.
2
Cf. Schreber (1903) and Freud (1911b).
3
In my paper on Schreber (Freud, 1911b [English translation, 452]).

107

108 totem and taboo
may be expected with certainty where a conﬂict has arisen
between diﬀerent impulses all of which are striving towards
omnipotence—for they clearly cannot all become omnipotent.
The pathological process in paranoia in fact makes use of the
mechanism of projection in order to deal with mental conﬂicts
of this kind. The typical case of such a conﬂict is one between
the two members of a pair of opposites—the case of an ambivalent attitude, which we have examined in detail as it appears in
someone mourning the death of a loved relative. [Cf. p. 60 ﬀ.]
This kind of case must seem particularly likely to provide a
motive for the creation of projections. Here again we are in
agreement with the writers who maintain that the ﬁrstborn
spirits were evil spirits, and who derive the idea of a soul from
the impression made by death upon the survivors. The only
diﬀerence is that we do not lay stress on the intellectual problem
with which death confronts the living; in our view the force
which gives the impetus to research is rather to be attributed
to the emotional conﬂict into which the survivors are plunged.
Thus man’s ﬁrst theoretical achievement—the creation of
spirits—seems to have arisen from the same source as the ﬁrst
moral restrictions to which he was subjected—the observances
of taboo. The fact that they had the same origin need not imply,
however, that they arose simultaneously. If the survivors’
position in relation to the dead was really what ﬁrst caused
primitive man to reﬂect, and compelled him to hand over some
of his omnipotence to the spirits and to sacriﬁce some of his
freedom of action, then these cultural products would constitute
a ﬁrst acknowledgment of  Ανάγκη [Necessity], which opposes
human narcissism. Primitive man would thus be submitting to
the supremacy of death with the same gesture with which he
seemed to be denying it.
If we may venture to exploit our hypothesis still further, we
may inquire which essential part of our psychological structure

animism, magic and the omnipotence of thoughts

is reﬂected and reproduced in the projective creation of souls
and spirits. It could scarcely be disputed that the primitive conception of a soul, however much it may diﬀer from the later,
purely immaterial soul, is nevertheless intrinsically the same;
that is to say, it assumes that both persons and things are of a
double nature and that their known attributes and modiﬁcations
are distributed between their two component portions. This original ‘duality’, to borrow an expression from Herbert Spencer
(1893), is identical with the dualism proclaimed by our current
distinction between soul and body and by such ineradicable
linguistic expressions of it as the use of phrases like ‘beside
himself ’ or ‘coming to himself ’ in relation to ﬁts of rage or
fainting (ibid., 144).
When we, no less than primitive man, project something into
external reality, what is happening must surely be this: we are
recognizing the existence of two states—one in which something is directly given to the senses and to consciousness (that is,
is present to them), and alongside it another, in which the same
thing is latent but capable of re-appearing. In short, we are recognizing the co-existence of perception and memory, or, putting it
more generally, the existence of unconscious mental processes
alongside the conscious ones.1 It might be said that in the last
analysis the ‘spirit’ of persons or things comes down to their
capacity to be remembered and imagined after perception of
them has ceased.
It is not, of course, to be expected that either the primitive or
the present-day concept of a ‘soul’ will be separated from that of
the other portion of the personality by the same line of demarcation which our modern science draws between conscious and
unconscious mental activity. The animistic soul unites properties
from both sides. Its volatile and mobile quality, its power of
Cf. my short paper, ‘A Note on the Unconscious in Psycho-Analysis’, ﬁrst
published in the Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research in 1912.
1

109

110 totem and taboo
leaving the body and of taking possession, temporarily or permanently, of another body—these are characteristics which
remind us unmistakably of the nature of consciousness. But the
way in which it remains concealed behind the manifest personality is reminiscent of the unconscious; immutability and
indestructibility are qualities which we no longer attribute to
conscious but rather to unconscious processes, and we regard
the latter as the true vehicle of mental activity.
I have already said that animism is a system of thought, the
ﬁrst complete theory of the universe, and I shall now go on to
draw certain conclusions from the psycho-analytic view of such
systems. Every day of our lives our experience is in a position to
show us the principal characteristics of a ‘system’. We have
dreams during the night and we have learnt how to interpret
them during the day. Dreams may, without contradicting their
nature, appear confused and disconnected. But they may, on the
contrary, simulate the orderly impressions of a real experience,
they may make one event follow from another and make one
portion of their content refer to another. Such a result can be
more or less successfully achieved; but it scarcely ever succeeds
so completely as to leave no absurdity, no rift in its texture,
visible. When we come to submit a dream to interpretation, we
ﬁnd that the erratic and irregular arrangement of its constituent
parts is quite unimportant from the point of view of our understanding it. The essential elements in a dream are the dreamthoughts, and these have meaning, connection and order. But
their order is quite other than that remembered by us in the
manifest content of the dream. In the latter the connection
between the dream-thoughts has been abandoned and may
either remain completely lost or be replaced by the new connection exhibited in the manifest content. The elements of the
dream, apart from their being condensed, are almost invariably
arranged in a new order more or less independent of their

animism, magic and the omnipotence of thoughts

earlier arrangement. Finally, it must be added that whatever the
original material of the dream-thoughts has been turned into by
the dream-activity is then subjected to a further inﬂuence. This is
what is known as ‘secondary revision’,1 and its purpose is evidently to get rid of the disconnectedness and unintelligibility
produced by the dream-activity and replace it by a new ‘meaning’. But this new meaning, arrived at by secondary revision, is
no longer the meaning of the dream-thoughts.2
The secondary revision of the product of dream-activity is an
admirable example of the nature and pretensions of a system.
There is an intellectual function in us which demands unity,
connection and intelligibility from any material, whether of perception or thought, that comes within its grasp; and if, as a result
of special circumstances, it is unable to establish a true connection, it does not hesitate to fabricate a false one. Systems constructed in this way are known to us not only from dreams, but
also from phobias, from obsessive thinking and from delusions.
The construction of systems is seen most strikingly in delusional
disorders (in paranoia), where it dominates the symptomatic
picture; but its occurrence in other forms of neuro-psychosis
must not be overlooked. In all these cases it can be shown that a
rearrangement of the psychical material has been made with a
fresh aim in view; and the rearrangement may often have to be a
drastic one if the outcome is to be made to appear intelligible
from the point of view of the system. Thus a system is best
characterized by the fact that at least two reasons can be discovered for each of its products: a reason based upon the premises of the system (a reason, then, which may be delusional)
and a concealed reason, which we must judge to be the truly
operative and the real one.
1

[‘Sekundäre Bearbeitung.’ The usual but misleading English translation of
this term is ‘secondary elaboration’.]
2
[Cf. The Interpretation of Dreams (1900), English translation, 1932, 451 ﬀ.]

111

112 totem and taboo
This may be illustrated by an example from a neurosis. In my
essay on taboo I mentioned a woman patient of mine whose
obsessional prohibitions showed the most perfect agreement
with a Maori taboo (p. 33). This woman’s neurosis was aimed at
her husband and culminated in her defence against an
unconscious wish that he should die. Her manifest, systematic
phobia, however, related to the mention of death in general,
while her husband was entirely excluded from it and was never
an object of her conscious solicitude. One day she heard her
husband giving instructions that his razors, which had lost their
edge, were to be taken to a particular shop to be re-set. Driven by
a strange uneasiness, she herself set oﬀ for the shop. After reconnoitring the ground, she came back and insisted that her husband should get rid of the razors for good and all, since she had
discovered that next door to the shop he had named there was an
undertaker’s establishment: owing to the plan he had made, she
said, the razors had become inextricably involved with thoughts
of death. This, then, was the systematic reason for her prohibition.
We may be quite sure that, even without her discovery of the
next-door shop, the patient would have come home with a
prohibition against the razors. It would have been enough if
she had met a hearse on her way to the shop, or someone
dressed in mourning or carrying a funeral wreath. The net of
possible determinants for the prohibition was spread wide
enough to catch the quarry in any event; it merely depended
on her decision whether to draw it together or not. It could be
shown that on other occasions she would not put the
determinants into operation, and she would explain this by
saying it had been ‘a better day’. The real cause of her prohibition upon the razors was, of course, as it was easy to discover,
her repugnance to attaching any pleasurable feeling to the idea
that her husband might cut his throat with the newly ground
razors.
In just the same way, an inhibition upon movement (an abasia

animism, magic and the omnipotence of thoughts

or an agoraphobia) will gradually become more complete and
more detailed, when once that system has succeeded in installing itself as a representative of an unconscious wish and of the
defence against the wish. Whatever other unconscious phantasies and operative reminiscences may be present in the patient
force their way to expression as symptoms along this same path,
once it has been opened, and group themselves into an
appropriate new arrangement within the framework of the
inhibition upon movement. Thus it would be a vain and indeed
a foolish task to attempt to understand the complexities and
details of the symptoms of (for example) an agoraphobia on the
basis of its underlying premises; for the whole consistency and
strictness of the combination are merely apparent. Just as with the
façades of dreams, if we look more attentively we ﬁnd the most
blatant inconsistency and arbitrariness in the structure of symptoms. The real reason for the details of a systematic phobia of
this kind lies in concealed determinants, which need have nothing to do with an inhibition upon movement; and that, too, is
why these phobias take such various and contradictory shapes in
diﬀerent people.
Let us now return to the animistic system with which we are
dealing. The insight we have gained into other psychological
systems enables us to conclude that with primitive man, too,
‘superstition’ need not be the only or the real reason for some
particular custom or observance and does not excuse us from the
duty of searching for its hidden motives. Under the domination
of an animistic system it is inevitable that every observance and
every activity shall have a systematic basis, which nowadays
we describe as ‘superstitious’. ‘Superstition’—like ‘anxiety’,
‘dreams’ and ‘demons’—is one of those provisional psychological concepts which have crumbled under the impact of
psycho-analytic research. Once we have penetrated behind these
constructions, which are like screens erected as defences against
correct understanding, we begin to realize that the mental life

113

114 totem and taboo
and cultural level of savages have not hitherto had all the recognition they deserve.
If we take instinctual repression as a measure of the level of
civilization that has been reached, we shall have to admit that
even under the animistic system advances and developments
took place which are unjustly despised on account of their
superstitious basis. When we are told that the warriors in a
savage tribe practise the greatest continence and cleanliness
when they go on the war-path, the explanation is put forward
that their motive is ‘a fear lest the enemy should obtain the
refuse of their persons, and thus be enabled to work their
destruction by magic’ (Frazer, 1911b, 157); and an analogous
superstitious reason could be suggested for their continence.
None the less the fact remains that they have made an instinctual
renunciation; and we can understand the position better if we
suppose that the savage warrior submits to these restrictions as a
countermeasure because he is on the point of yielding completely to the satisfaction of cruel and hostile impulses which are
as a rule prohibited to him. The same is true of the numerous
cases of sexual restrictions being imposed on anyone who is
engaged on diﬃcult or responsible work (ibid., 200 f.). Though
the grounds alleged for these prohibitions may belong to a
magical context, yet the fundamental idea of gaining greater
strength by renouncing some instinctual satisfaction remains
unmistakable; and the hygienic root of the prohibition which
lies alongside its magical rationalization must not be overlooked.
When the men of a savage tribe go out on an expedition to hunt,
to ﬁsh, to ﬁght or to gather precious plants, their wives left at
home are subjected to many oppressive restrictions, to which
the savages themselves ascribe a favourable inﬂuence, operating
at a distance upon the success of the expedition. But it requires
very little penetration to see that this factor which operates at a
distance is nothing other than the absent men’s longing
thoughts of home, and that behind these disguises lies a sound

animism, magic and the omnipotence of thoughts

piece of psychological insight that the men will only do their
best if they feel completely secure about the women whom they
have left behind them unguarded. Sometimes they will even
themselves declare, without alleging any magical reasons, that a
wife’s inﬁdelity in marriage will bring to nothing the eﬀorts of
an absent husband engaged on some responsible work.
The countless taboo regulations to which the women in savage communities are subject during menstruation are said to be
due to a superstitious horror of blood, and this is no doubt in
fact one of their determinants. But it would be wrong to overlook the possibility that in this case the horror of blood also
serves æsthetic and hygienic purposes, which are obliged in
every case to cloak themselves behind magical motives.
I am under no illusion that in putting forward these attempted
explanations I am laying myself open to the charge of endowing
modern savages with a subtlety in their mental activities which
exceeds all probability. It seems to me quite possible, however,
that the same may be true of our attitude towards the psychology of those races that have remained at the animistic level as is
true of our attitude towards the mental life of children, which
we adults no longer understand and whose fullness and delicacy
of feeling we have in consequence so greatly underestimated.
One further group of taboo observances, which have not
hitherto been accounted for, deserve mention, since they admit
of an explanation which is familiar to psycho-analysts. Among
many savage peoples there is a prohibition against keeping sharp
weapons or cutting instruments in a house. Frazer (1911b, 238)
quotes a German superstition to the eﬀect that a knife should not
be left edge upwards, for fear that God and the angels might be
injured on it. May we not recognize in this taboo a premonitory
warning against possible ‘symptomatic acts’ in the execution of
which a sharp weapon might be employed by unconscious evil
impulses?

115

4
THE RETURN OF TOTEMISM
IN CHILDHOOD
There are no grounds for fearing that psycho-analysis, which
ﬁrst discovered that psychical acts and structures are invariably
over-determined,1 will be tempted to trace the origin of anything so complicated as religion to a single source. If psychoanalysis is compelled—and is, indeed, in duty bound—to lay all
the emphasis upon one particular source, that does not mean it
is claiming either that that source is the only one or that it
occupies ﬁrst place among the numerous contributory factors.
Only when we can synthesize the ﬁndings in the diﬀerent ﬁelds
of research will it become possible to arrive at the relative
importance of the part played in the genesis of religion by the
mechanism discussed in these pages. Such a task lies beyond the
means as well as beyond the purposes of a psycho-analyst.

1

[I.e. have two or more simultaneous determinants.]

the return of totemism in childhood

(1)
In the ﬁrst of this series of essays we became acquainted with the
concept of totemism. We heard that totemism is a system which
takes the place of a religion among certain primitive peoples of
Australia, America and Africa, and provides the basis of their
social organization. As we have heard, it was a Scotsman,
McLennan, who in 1869 ﬁrst drew general attention to the phenomena of totemism (which had hitherto been regarded as
mere curiosities) by giving voice to a suspicion that a large
number of customs and usages current in various societies
ancient and modern were to be explained as remnants of a
totemic age. Since that date science has fully accepted his estimate of totemism. Let me quote, as one of the most recent
statements on the subject, a passage from Wundt’s Elemente der
Völkerpsychologie (1912, 139): ‘In the light of all these facts, the
conclusion appears highly probable that at some time totemic
culture everywhere paved the way for a more advanced civilization, and, thus, that it represents a transitional stage between the
age of primitive men and the era of heroes and gods.’ [English
translation, 139.]
The purpose of the present essays obliges us to enter more
deeply into the nature of totemism. For reasons which will
presently become clear I will begin with an account given by
Reinach, who, in 1900.1 sketched out a ‘Code du totémisme’ in
twelve Articles—a catechism, as it were, of the totemic religion:
(1) Certain animals may neither be killed nor eaten, but individual members of the species are reared by human beings
and cared for by them.
(2) An animal which has died an accidental death is mourned
1

Cf. Reinach (1905–12, 1, 17 ﬀ.).

117

118 totem and taboo

(3)
(4)

(5)
(6)

(7)
(8)

(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)

over and buried with the same honours as a member of
the clan.
In some instances the eating prohibition extends only to
one particular part of the animal’s body.
When one of the animals which are usually spared has to
be killed under the stress of necessity, apologies are
oﬀered to it and an attempt is made by means of various
artiﬁces and evasions to mitigate the violation of the
taboo—that is to say, of the murder.
When the animal is made the victim of a ritual sacriﬁce, is
solemnly bewailed.
On particular solemn occasions and at religious ceremonies the skins of certain animals are worn. Where
totemism is still in force, they are the totem animals.
Clans and individuals adopt the names of animals—viz. of
the totem animals.
Many clans make use of representations of animals on
their standards and weapons; the men have pictures of
animals painted or tattooed on their bodies.
If the totem is a formidable or dangerous animal, it is
supposed to spare members of the clan named after it.
The totem animal protects and gives warning to members
of its clan.
The totem animal foretells the future to the loyal members
of its clan and serves them as guide.
The members of the totemic clan often believe that they
are related to the totem animal by the bond of a common
ancestry.

This catechism of the totemic religion can only be seen at its
proper value if we take into account the fact that Reinach has
included in it all the indications and traces from which the
earlier existence of a totemic system can be inferred. The
author’s peculiar attitude to the problem is shown by his

the return of totemism in childhood

partial neglect of the essential features of totemism. As we shall
see, he has relegated one of the two principal articles of the
totemic catechism to the background and entirely overlooked
the other.
To obtain a correct picture of the nature of totemism we must
turn to another author, who has devoted a four-volume work to
the subject, which combines the fullest collection of the relevant
observations with the most detailed discussion of the problems
they raise. We shall remain indebted to J. G. Frazer, the author of
Totemism and Exogamy (1910), both for enjoyment and instruction,
even if psycho-analytic research may lead to conclusions which
diﬀer widely from his.1
1

It may be as well, however, to warn the reader, in advance, of the diﬃculties
with which any statements on the subject have to contend.
In the ﬁrst place, those who collect the observations are not the same as
those who examine and discuss them. The former are travellers and missionaries while the latter are students who may never have set eyes on the objects of
their researches. Again, communication with savages is not an easy matter. The
observers are not always acquainted with the native language but may be
obliged to rely on the help of interpreters or to conduct their inquiries through
the medium of pidgin-English. Savages are not communicative on the subject
of the most intimate details of their cultural life and they talk openly only to
those foreigners who have lived among them for many years. They often give
false or misleading information for a great variety of motives. (Cf. Frazer, 1910,
1, 150 f.) It should not be forgotten that primitive races are not young races
but are in fact as old as civilized races. There is no reason to suppose that, for
the beneﬁt of our information, they have retained their original ideas and
institutions undeveloped and undistorted. On the contrary, it is certain that
there have been profound changes in every direction among primitive races, so
that it is never possible to decide without hesitation how far their present-day
conditions and opinions preserve the primæval past in a petriﬁed form and
how far they are distortions and modiﬁcations of it. Hence arise the all-toofrequent disputes among the authorities as to which characteristics of a primitive civilization are to be regarded as primary and as to which are later and
secondary developments. The determination of the original state of things thus

119

120 totem and taboo
‘A totem’, wrote Frazer in his ﬁrst essay on the subject,1 ‘is a
class of material objects which a savage regards with superstitious respect, believing that there exists between him and every
member of the class an intimate and altogether special relation. . . .The connection between a man and his totem is mutually beneﬁcent; the totem protects the man, and the man shows
his respect for the totem in various ways, by not killing it if it be
an animal, and not cutting or gathering it if it be a plant. As
distinguished from a fetish, a totem is never an isolated individual, but always a class of objects, generally a species of animals or of plants, more rarely a class of inanimate natural
objects, very rarely a class of artiﬁcial objects. . . .
‘Totems are of at least three kinds: (1) the clan totem, common to a whole clan, and passing by inheritance from generation to generation; (2) the sex totem, common either to all the
males or to all the females of a tribe, to the exclusion in either
case of the other sex; (3) the individual totem, belonging to a
single individual and not passing to his descendants. . . .’
The last two kinds of totem do not compare in signiﬁcance
with the clan totem. Unless we are quite mistaken, they are late
developments and of little importance for the essential nature of
the totem.
‘The clan totem is reverenced by a body of men and women
who call themselves by the name of the totem, believe themselves to be of one blood, descendants of a common ancestor,
and are bound together by common obligations to each other
and by a common faith in the totem. Totemism is thus both a
religious and a social system. In its religious aspect it consists of
invariably remains a matter of construction. Finally, it is not easy to feel one’s
way into primitive modes of thinking. We misunderstand primitive men just as
easily as we do children, and we are always apt to interpret their actions and
feelings according to our own mental constellations.
1

Totemism, Edinburgh, 1887, reprinted in Frazer (1910, 1, 3 ﬀ.).

the return of totemism in childhood

the relations of mutual respect and protection between a man
and his totem; in its social aspect it consists of the relations of the
clansmen to each other and to men of other clans. In the later
history of totemism these two sides, the religious and the social,
tend to part company; the social system sometimes survives the
religious; and, on the other hand, religion sometimes bears
traces of totemism in countries where the social system based on
totemism has disappeared. How in the origin of totemism these
two sides were related to each other it is, in our ignorance of that
origin, impossible to say with certainty. But on the whole the
evidence points strongly to the conclusion that the two sides
were originally inseparable; that, in other words, the farther we
go back, the more we should ﬁnd that the clansman regards
himself and his totem as beings of the same species, and the less
he distinguishes between conduct towards his totem and
towards his fellow-clansmen.’
In giving particulars of totemism as a religious system,
Frazer begins by stating that the members of a totem clan call
themselves by the name of their totem, and commonly believe
themselves to be actually descended from it.1 It follows from this
belief that they will not hunt the totem animal or kill or eat it
and, if it is something other than an animal, they refrain from
making use of it in other ways. The rules against killing or eating
the totem are not the only taboos; sometimes they are forbidden
to touch it, or even to look at it; in a number of cases the totem
may not be spoken of by its proper name. Any violation of the
taboos that protect the totem are automatically punished by
severe illness or death.2
Specimens of the totem animal are occasionally reared by the
clan and cared for in captivity.3 A totem animal that is found
1

[The last nine words are printed in spaced type in the original.]
Cf. my earlier essay on taboo [above, p. 24].
3
As is done to this day with the she-wolf in her cage beside the steps leading
up to the Capitol in Rome and with the bears in their den at Berne.
2

121

122 totem and taboo
dead is mourned for and buried like a dead clansman. If it is
necessary to kill a totem animal, this is done according to a
prescribed ritual of apologies and ceremonies of expiation.
The clan expects to receive protection and care from its totem.
If it is a dangerous animal (such as a beast of prey or a venomous
snake) there is a presumption that it will do no harm to its
clansmen; and if that expectation is not fulﬁlled the injured man
is expelled from the clan. Oaths, in Frazer’s opinion, were originally ordeals; thus, many tests of descent and legitimacy were
submitted for decision to the totem. The totem gives help in
sickness and delivers omens and warnings to its clan. The
appearance of the totem in or about a house is often regarded as
an omen of death; the totem has come to fetch his kinsman.1
In particular important circumstances the clansman seeks to
emphasize his kinship with the totem by making himself
resemble it externally, by dressing in the skin of the animal, by
incising a picture of the totem upon his own body, and so on.
This identiﬁcation with the totem is carried into eﬀect in actions
and words on the ceremonial occasions of birth, initiation and
burial. Various magical and religious purposes are served by
dances in which all the clansmen disguise themselves as their
totem and imitate its behaviour. Lastly, there are ceremonies in
which the totem animal is ceremoniously killed.2
The social aspect of totemism is principally expressed in a
severely enforced injunction and a sweeping restriction.
The members of a totem clan are brothers and sisters and are
bound to help and protect one another. If a member of a clan is
killed by someone outside it, the whole clan of the aggressor is
responsible for the deed and the whole clan of the murdered
man is at one in demanding satisfaction for the blood that has
been shed. The totem bond is stronger than that of the family in
1
2

Like the White Lady in certain aristocratic families.
Frazer (1910, 1, 45). See my discussion of sacriﬁce below [p. 154 ﬀ.].

the return of totemism in childhood

our sense. The two do not coincide, since the totem is as a rule
inherited through the female line, and it is possible that paternal
descent may originally have been left entirely out of account.
The corresponding taboo restriction prohibits members of
the same totem clan from marrying or having sexual intercourse
with each other. Here we have the notorious and mysterious
correlate of totemism—exogamy. I have devoted the whole of
the ﬁrst essay in the present volume to that subject, so that here I
need only repeat that it originates from the intensiﬁcation
among savages of the horror of incest, that it would be fully
explained as an assurance against incest under conditions of
group marriage, and that it is primarily aimed at restraining the
younger generation from incest and that only as a later development does it interfere with the older generation. [See above,
pp. 4 and 9.]
To Frazer’s account of totemism—one of the earliest in the literature of the subject—I will add a few extracts from one of the
most recent ones. In his Elemente der Völkerpsychologie, Wundt (1912,
116 ﬀ.) writes as follows: ‘The totem animal is also usually
regarded as the ancestral animal of the group in question.
“Totem” is, on the one hand, a group name, and, on the other, a
name indicative of ancestry. In the latter connection it has also a
mythological signiﬁcance. These various ideas, however, interplay in numerous ways. Some of the meanings may recede, so
that totems have frequently become a mere nomenclature of
tribal divisions, while at other times the idea of ancestry, or,
perhaps also, the cult signiﬁcance, predominates. . . .’ The concept of the totem has a decisive inﬂuence upon tribal division
and tribal organization, which are subject to certain norms of
custom. ‘These norms, and their ﬁxed place in the beliefs and
feelings of the tribal members, are connected with the fact that
originally, at all events, the totem animal was regarded, for the
most part, as having not merely given its name to a group of

123

124 totem and taboo
tribal members but as having actually been its forefather. . . .
Bound up with this is the further fact that these animal ancestors
possessed a cult. . . . Aside from speciﬁc ceremonies and ceremonial festivals, this animal cult originally found expression
primarily in the relations maintained towards the totem animal.
It was not merely a particular animal that was to a certain extent
held sacred, but every representative of the species. The totem
members were forbidden to eat the ﬂesh of the totem animal, or
were allowed to do so only under speciﬁc conditions. A
signiﬁcant counter-phenomenon, not irreconcilable with this, is
the fact that on certain occasions the eating of the totem ﬂesh
constituted a sort of ceremony. . . .’
‘. . . The most important social aspect of this totemic tribal
organization, however, consists in the fact that it involved certain
norms of custom regulating the intercourse of the separate
groups with one another. Of these norms, those governing
marriage relations were of ﬁrst importance. The tribal
organization of this period was bound up with an important
institution, exogamy, which originated in the totemic age.’ [English
translation, 116 f.]
If we seek to penetrate to the original nature of totemism, without regard to subsequent accretions or attenuations, we ﬁnd that
its essential characteristics are these: Originally, all totems were
animals, and were regarded as the ancestors of the diﬀerent
clans. Totems were inherited only through the female line. There
was a prohibition against killing the totem (or—which, under
primitive conditions, is the same thing—against eating it).
Members of a totem clan were forbidden to practise sexual
intercourse with one another.1
1

[The last three sentences are printed in spaced type in the original.] The
picture of totemism given by Frazer in his second work on the subject (‘The
Origin of Totemism’, published in the Fortnightly Review in 1899) agrees with

the return of totemism in childhood

We shall now, perhaps, be struck by the fact that in Reinach’s
Code du totémisme one of the two principal taboos, that of exogamy,
is not mentioned at all, while the belief upon which the second
one is founded, namely descent from the totem animal, is only
referred to in passing. My reason, however, for selecting the
account given by Reinach (a writer, incidentally) who has made
very valuable contributions to the subject) was to prepare us for
the diﬀerences of opinion between the authorities—diﬀerences
into which we must now enter.

(2)
The more incontestable became the conclusion that totemism
constitutes a regular phase in all cultures, the more urgent
became the need for arriving at an understanding of it and for
throwing light upon the puzzle of its essential nature. Everything
connected with totemism seems to be puzzling: the decisive
problems concern the origin of the idea of descent from the
totem and the reasons for exogamy (or rather for the taboo upon
incest of which exogamy is the expression), as well as the relation between these two institutions, totemic organization and
prohibition of incest. Any satisfactory explanation should be at
once an historical and a psychological one. It should tell us
what I have written above: ‘Thus, Totemism has commonly been treated as a
primitive system both of religion and of society. As a system of religion it
embraces the mystic union of the savage with his totem; as a system of society
it comprises the relations in which men and women of the same totem stand to
each other and to the members of other totemic groups. And corresponding
to these two sides of the system are two rough and ready tests or canons
of Totemism: ﬁrst, the rule that a man may not kill or eat his totem animal or
plant; and second, the rule that he may not marry or cohabit with a woman of
the same totem.’ [Reprinted in Frazer, 1910, 1, 101.] Frazer then proceeds
(thus plunging us into the middle of the controversies on totemism): ‘Whether
the two sides—the religious and the social—have always co-existed or are
essentially independent, is a question which has been variously answered.’

125

126 totem and taboo
under what conditions this peculiar institution developed and to
what psychical needs in men it has given expression.
My readers will, I am sure, be astonished to hear of the variety
of angles from which attempts have been made to answer these
questions, and of the wide divergences of opinion upon them
put forward by the experts. Almost any generalization that could
be made on the subject of totemism and exogamy seems open to
question. Even the account that I have just given, derived from
the book published by Frazer in 1887, is open to the criticism
that it expresses the present writer’s arbitrary preferences; and
indeed it would be contested to-day by Frazer himself; who has
repeatedly changed his opinions on the subject.1
It is plausible to suppose that an understanding of the essential
nature of totemism and exogamy would best be arrived at, if it
were possible to come nearer to the origins of the two institutions. But in this connection we must bear in mind Andrew
Lang’s warning that even primitive peoples have not retained the
original forms of those institutions nor the conditions which
gave rise to them; so that we have nothing whatever but hypotheses to fall back upon as a substitute for the observations which
we are without.2 Some of the attempted explanations seem, in
the judgment of a psychologist, inadequate at the very outset:
they are too rational and take no account of the emotional
character of the matters to be explained. Others are based on
1

He makes the following admirable comment upon such changes of opinion:
‘That my conclusions on these diﬃcult questions are ﬁnal, I am not so foolish
as to pretend. I have changed my views repeatedly, and I am resolved to change
them again with every change of the evidence, for like a chameleon the candid
inquirer should shift his colours with the shifting colours of the ground he
treads.’ (Frazer, 1910, 1, xiii.)
2
By the nature of the case, as the origin of totemism lies far beyond our
powers of historical examination or of experiment, we must have recourse as
regards this matter to conjecture.’ (Lang, 1905, 27.) ‘Nowhere do we see
absolutely primitive man, and a totemic system in the making.’ (Ibid., 29.)

the return of totemism in childhood

assumptions which are unconﬁrmed by observation. Yet others
rely upon material which would be better interpreted in another
way. There is generally little diﬃculty in refuting the various
views put forward: the authorities are as usual more eﬀective in
their criticisms of one another’s work than in their own productions. The conclusion upon most of the points raised must be a
non liquet. It is not surprising, therefore, that in the most recent
literature on the subject (which is for the most part passed over
in the present work) an unmistakable tendency emerges to reject
any general solution of totemic problems as impracticable. (See,
for instance, Goldenweiser, 1910.) In the discussion of
these conﬂicting hypotheses which follows, I have ventured to
disregard their chronological sequence.
(a) The origin of totemism
The question of the origin of totemism may be put in another
way: how did it come about that primitive men called themselves
(and their clans) after animals, plants and inanimate objects?1
McLennan (1865 and 1869–70), the Scot who discovered
totemism and exogamy for the world of science, refrained from
publishing any opinion on the origin of totemism. According to
Andrew Lang (1905, 34) he was at one time inclined to think
that it originated from the custom of tattooing. I propose to
divide the published theories on the origin of totemism into
three groups—(α) the nominalist, (β ) the sociological and (γ)
the psychological.
() Nominalist theories
My accounts of these theories will justify my having brought
them together under the title I have adopted.
1

In the ﬁrst instance probably after animals only.

127

128 totem and taboo
Garcilasso de la Vega, a descendant of the Peruvian Incas, who
wrote a history of his people in the seventeenth century, seems
already to have attributed the origin of what he knew of totemic
phenomena to the need felt by clans to distinguish themselves
from one another by the use of names. (Lang, 1905, 34.) Hundreds of years later the same idea was again proposed. Keane
[1899, 396]1 regards totems as ‘heraldic badges’ by means of
which individuals, families and clans sought to distinguish
themselves from one another. The same idea is expressed once
more by Max-Müller (1897 [1, 201]):2 ‘A totem is a clan mark,
then a clan name, then the name of the ancestor of a clan, and
lastly the name of something worshipped by a clan.’ Julius
Pikler,3 writing later, declares: ‘Mankind required both for
communities and for individuals a permanent name which
could be ﬁxed in writing. . . . Thus totemism did not arise from
the religious needs of men but from their practical, everyday
needs. The core of totemism, nomenclature, is a result of the
primitive technique of writing. In its nature a totem is like an
easily drawn pictograph. But when once savages bore the name
of an animal, they went on to form the idea of kinship with it.’
In the same way, Herbert Spencer (1870 and 1893, 331–346)
regards the giving of names as the decisive factor in the origin of
totemism. The personal characteristics of particular individuals,
he argues, prompted the idea of calling them after animals, and
in that way they acquired laudatory names or nicknames which
were handed on to their descendants. As a result of the vagueness
and unintelligibility of primitive speech, later generations
interpreted these names as evidence of descent from the actual
1

Quoted by Lang [1903, ix. f.].
Quoted by Lang [1905, 118].
3
Pickler and Somló [1900]. These authors justly describe their attempted
explanation of the origin of totemism as ‘a contribution to the materialist
theory of history’.
2

the return of totemism in childhood

animals. Totemism would thus be shown to be a misunderstood
form of ancestor worship.
Lord Avebury (better known under his earlier name of Sir
John Lubbock) gives a very similar account of the origin of
totemism, though without insisting upon the element of misunderstanding. If, he says, we wish to explain animal-worship,
we must not forget how often human names are borrowed from
animals. The children and followers of a man who was called
‘Bear’ or ‘Lion’ naturally turned his name into a clan-name.
Thence it came about that the animal itself would come to be
regarded ‘ﬁrst with interest, then with respect and at length with
a sort of awe’. [Lubbock, 1870, 171.]
What would seem to be an incontrovertible objection to this
derivation of totem names from the names of individuals was
brought forward by Fison.1 He showed from conditions in Australia that the totem is invariably ‘the badge of a group, not of an
individual’. But even if this were not so, and the totem was
originally the name of an individual, it could never—since
totems are inherited through the female line—be transmitted to
his children.
Moreover, the theories which I have so far discussed are obviously inadequate. They might perhaps explain the fact that primitive peoples adopt animal names for their clans, but they could
never explain the importance that has become attached to this
nomenclature—namely, the totemic system. The theory belonging to this group which most deserves attention is that proposed
by Andrew Lang (1903 and 1905). He, too, regards the giving of
names as the heart of the problem, but he introduces two interesting psychological factors and may thus claim to have led the
way towards the ﬁnal solution of the enigma of totemism.
Andrew Lang regards it as initially a matter of indiﬀerence
how clans obtained their animal names. It is only necessary to
1

Fison and Howitt (1880, 165), quoted by Lang (1905 [141]).

129

130 totem and taboo
assume that they awoke one day to the consciousness that they
bore such names and could give no account of how this had
come about. The origin of the names had been forgotten.1 They
would then attempt to arrive at an explanation by speculating on
the subject; and, in view of their belief in the importance of
names, they were bound to reach all the ideas contained in the
totemic system. Primitive races (as well as modern savages and
even our own children2) do not, like us, regard names as something indiﬀerent and conventional, but as signiﬁcant and essential. A man’s name is a principal component of his personality,
perhaps even a portion of his soul. The fact of a primitive man
bearing the same name as an animal must lead him to assume
the existence of a mysterious and signiﬁcant bond between himself and that particular species of animal. What other bond could
it be than one of blood relationship? Once the similarity of
names had led to this conclusion, the blood taboo would
immediately involve all the totemic ordinances, including
exogamy. ‘No more than these three things—a group animal
name of unknown origin; belief in a transcendental connection
between all bearers, human and bestial, of the same name; and
belief in the blood superstitions—was needed to give rise to all
the totemic creeds and practices, including exogamy.’ (Lang,
1905, 125 f.)
Lang’s explanation falls into two parts. One part of it traces the
totemic system as a matter of psychological necessity from the
fact of the totems having animal names—always presupposing
that the origin of these names had been forgotten. The second
part of his theory goes on to try to explain how the names in fact
originated; as we shall see, it is of a very diﬀerent character from
the ﬁrst part.
This second part of Lang’s theory diﬀers in no essential way
1
2

[This sentence is printed in spaced type by Freud.]
See the discussion of taboo above, p. 63 ﬀ.

the return of totemism in childhood

from the other theories which I have called ‘nominalist’. The
practical necessity for diﬀerentiation compelled the various clans
to adopt names, and they therefore acquiesced in the names by
which each clan was called by another clan. This ‘naming from
without’ is the special feature of Lang’s construction. The fact
that the names adopted in this way were borrowed from animals
needs no special comment and there is no reason why they
should have been regarded in primitive times as insulting or
derisive. Moreover, Lang has adduced not a few instances from
later historical times in which names that were originally given
in derision by outsiders have been accepted and willingly
adopted (e.g. ‘Les Gueux’, ‘Whigs’ and ‘Tories’). The hypothesis
that in the course of time the origin of these names was forgotten connects this part of Lang’s theory with the other part which
I have already discussed.
() Sociological theories
Reinach, who has been successful in tracing survivals of the
totemic system in the cults and usages of later periods but who
has always attached small importance to the factor of descent
from the totem, remarks conﬁdently in one passage that in his
opinion totemism is nothing more than ‘une hypertrophie de l’instinct
social’. (Reinach, 1905–12, 1, 41.) A similar view seems to run
through the recent book by Durkheim (1912). The totem, he
argues, is the visible representative of social religion among the
races concerned: it embodies the community, which is the true
object of their worship.
Other writers have sought to ﬁnd a more precise basis for the
participation of the social instincts in the formation of totemic
institutions. Thus Haddon (1902 [745])1 supposes that each
primitive clan originally subsisted upon some one species of
1

Quoted by Frazer (1910, 4, 50).

131

132 totem and taboo
animal or plant and perhaps traded in that particular article of
food and exchanged it with other clans. It would inevitably follow that this clan would be known to the others by the name of
the animal which was of such importance to it. At the same time
the clan would be bound to become especially familiar with the
animal and develop a peculiar interest in it, though this would
be founded on no psychical motive other than the most
elementary and urgent of human needs, that is, on hunger.
Against this most ‘rational’ of all the theories of totemism it
has been objected that feeding conditions of this kind are never
found among primitive races and have probably never existed.
Savages are omnivorous, and the more so the lower their condition. Nor is it easy to see how an exclusive diet such as this could
have developed into an almost religious attitude to the totem,
culminating in absolute abstention from the favourite food. [Cf.
Frazer, 1910, 4, 51.]
The ﬁrst of the three theories on the origin of totemism
which Frazer himself has supported at diﬀerent times was a
psychological one, and I shall deal with it later. His second
theory, with which we are here concerned, took form under
the inﬂuence of a momentous publication by two men who
had made researches among the natives of Central Australia.
Spencer and Gillen (1899) described a number of peculiar
observances, usages and beliefs found in a group of tribes
known as the Arunta nation; and Frazer agreed with their opinion that these peculiarities were to be regarded as features of a
primitive condition of things and might throw light upon the
original and true meaning of totemism.
The peculiarities found in the Arunta tribe (a portion of the
Arunta nation) are as follows:
(1) The Arunta are divided into totem clans, but the totem is
not hereditary but determined for each individual in a
manner to be described presently.

the return of totemism in childhood

(2) The totem clans are not exogamous; but the restrictions
upon marriage are based upon a highly developed division
into marriage-classes, which have no connection with the
totem.
(3) The function of the totem clans lies in their performing a
ceremony which has as its aim the multiplication of the
edible totem object by a characteristically magical method.
(This ceremony is known as lntichiuma.)
(4) The Arunta have a peculiar theory of conception and
reincarnation. They believe that there are places scattered
over the country [‘totem centres’] at each of which the
spirits of the dead of some one totem await reincarnation
and enter the body of any woman who passes by the
spot. When a child is born, the mother reports at which
of these places she thinks it was conceived, and the child’s
totem is determined accordingly. It is further believed that
the spirits (both of the dead and of the reborn) are
intimately associated with certain peculiar stone
amulets, known as churinga, which are found at these same
centres.
Two factors seem to have led Frazer to suppose that the observances among the Arunta constitute the oldest form of totemism. First, there was the existence of certain myths which
declared that the ancestors of the Arunta regularly ate their totem
and always married women of their own totem. Secondly, there
was the apparent disregard of the sexual act in their theory of
conception. People who had not yet discovered that conception
is the result of sexual intercourse might surely be regarded as the
most backward and primitive of living men.
By focusing his judgment of totemism upon the intichiuma
ceremony, Frazer came all at once to see the totemic system in an
entirely new light: as a purely practical organization for meeting
the most natural of human needs. (Cf. Haddon’s theory above

133

134 totem and taboo
[p. 131].)1 The system was simply an example upon a large scale
of ‘co-operative magic’. Primitive men set up what might be
described as a magical producers’ and consumers’ union. Each
totem clan undertook the business of guaranteeing the plentiful
supply of one particular article of food. Where non-edible
totems were concerned (such as dangerous animals, or rain,
wind, etc.) the duty of the totem clan lay in controlling the
natural force in question and in counteracting its injurious possibilities. The achievements of each clan were to the advantage of
all the rest. Since each clan might eat none, or only very little, of
its own totem, it provided that valuable material for the other
clans and was itself provided in exchange with what they produced as their social totemic duty. In the light of the insight
which he thus obtained from the intichiuma ceremony, Frazer
came to believe that the prohibition against eating one’s own
totem had blinded people to the more important element in the
situation, namely the injunction to produce as much as possible
of an edible totem to meet the needs of other people.
Frazer accepted the Arunta tradition that each totem clan had
originally eaten its own totem without restriction. But it was
then diﬃcult to understand the next stage in development, at
which the clansmen became content with assuring a supply of
the totem for others, while themselves renouncing its enjoyment
almost completely. He supposed that this restriction had arisen,
not from any kind of religious deference, but perhaps from
observing that animals never fed upon their own kind: to do so
might imply a breach in their identiﬁcation with their totem and
consequently reduce their power of controlling it. Or it might be
that by sparing the creatures they hoped to conciliate them.
Frazer, however, makes no disguise of the diﬃculties involved in
1

‘There is nothing vague or mystical about it, nothing of that metaphysical
haze which some writers love to conjure up over the humble beginnings of
human speculation, but which is utterly foreign to the simple, sensuous and
concrete modes of thought of the savage.’ (Frazer, 1910, 1, 117.)

the return of totemism in childhood

these explanations (1910, 1, 121 ﬀ.): nor does he venture to
suggest by what means the custom described in the Arunta
myths of marrying within the totem was transformed into
exogamy.
The theory based by Frazer on the intichiuma ceremony stands
or falls with the assertion of the primitive character of
the Arunta institutions. But in face of the objections raised by
Durkheim1 and Lang (1903 and 1905), that assertion appears
untenable. On the contrary, the Arunta seem to be the most
highly developed of the Australian tribes and to represent a stage
of totemism in dissolution rather than its beginnings. The myths
which impressed Frazer so deeply because, in contrast to the
conditions that rule to-day, they lay stress upon liberty to eat the
totem and to marry within the totem—these myths are easily
explicable as wishful phantasies which, like the myth of a
Golden Age, have been projected back into the past.
() Psychological theories
Frazer’s ﬁrst psychological theory, formed before he became
acquainted with Spencer and Gillen’s observations, was based on
the belief in an ‘external soul’.2 The totem, according to this
view, represented a safe place of refuge in which the soul could
be deposited and so escape the dangers which threatened it.
When a primitive man had deposited his soul in his totem he
himself was invulnerable, and he naturally avoided doing any
injury to the receptacle of his soul. Since, however, he did not
know in which particular individual of the animal species concerned his own soul was lodged, it was reasonable for him to
spare the whole species.
1

In L’année sociologique (1898, 1902, 1905, etc.); see especially ‘Sur le totémisme’
(1902 [89 f.]).
2
See Frazer: The Golden Bough, First Edition (1890), 2, 332 ﬀ. [Cf. also Frazer,
1910, 4, 52 ﬀ.]

135

136 totem and taboo
Frazer himself subsequently abandoned this theory that totemism was derived from a belief in souls; and, after coming to know
of Spencer and Gillen’s observations, adopted the sociological
theory which I have already discussed. But he came to see himself
that the motive from which that second theory derived totemism
was too ‘rational’ and that it implied a social organization which
was too complicated to be described as primitive.1 The magical
co-operative societies now seemed to him to be the fruit rather
than the seed of totemism. He sought for some simpler factor,
some primitive superstition behind these structures, to which
the origin of totemism might be traced back. At last he found this
original factor in the Arunta’s remarkable story of conception.
The Arunta, as I have already explained, eliminate the connection between the sexual act and conception. At the moment at
which a woman feels she is a mother, a spirit, which has been
awaiting reincarnation in the nearest totem centre where the
spirits of the dead collect, has entered her body. She will bear
this spirit as a child, and the child will have the same totem as all
the spirits waiting at that particular centre. This theory of conception cannot explain totemism, since it presupposes the existence of totems. But let us go back a step further and suppose that
originally the woman believed that the animal, plant, stone or
other object, with which her imagination was occupied at the
moment when she ﬁrst felt she was a mother, actually made its
way into her and was later born in human form. In that case the
identity between a man and his totem would have a factual basis
in his mother’s belief and all the remaining totem ordinances
(with the exception of exogamy) would follow. A man would
refuse to eat this animal or plant because to do so would amount
1

‘It is unlikely that a community of savages should deliberately parcel out the
realm of nature into provinces, assign each province to a particular band of
magicians, and bid all the bands to work their magic and weave their spells for
the common good.’ (Frazer, 1910, 4, 57.)

the return of totemism in childhood

to eating himself. He would, however, have a reason for
occasionally partaking of his totem in a ceremonial manner,
because in that way he might strengthen his identiﬁcation with
the totem, which is the essence of totemism. Some observations
made by Rivers [1909, 173 f.] upon the natives of the Banks’
Islands1 seemed to prove a direct identiﬁcation of human beings
with their totem on the basis of a similar theory of conception.
Accordingly, the ultimate source of totemism would be the
savages’ ignorance of the process by which men and animals
reproduce their kind; and, in particular, ignorance of the part
played by the male in fertilization. This ignorance must have
been facilitated by the long interval between the act of fertilization and the birth of the child (or the ﬁrst perception of its
movements). Thus totemism would be a creation of the feminine rather than of the masculine mind: its roots would lie in
‘the sick fancies of pregnant women’. ‘Anything indeed that
struck a woman at that mysterious moment of her life when she
ﬁrst knows herself to be a mother might easily be identiﬁed by
her with the child in her womb. Such maternal fancies, so
natural and seemingly so universal, appear to be the root of
totemism.’ (Frazer, 1910, 4, 63.)
The main objection to this third of Frazer’s theories is the
same as has already been brought against the second or sociological one. The Arunta seem to be far removed from the beginnings of totemism. Their denial of paternity does not appear to
rest upon primitive ignorance; in some respects they themselves
make use of descent through the father. They seem to have sacriﬁced paternity for the sake of some sort of speculation designed
to honour the souls of their ancestors.2 They have enlarged the
myth of the impregnation of a virgin by the spirit into a general
theory of conception; but that is no reason why ignorance of the
1
2

Quoted by Frazer (1910, 2, 89 ﬀ. and 4, 59).
‘That belief is a philosophy far from primitive.’ (Lang, 1905, 192.)

137

138 totem and taboo
conditions governing fertilization should be imputed to them
any more than to the peoples of antiquity at the time of the
origin of the Christian myths.
Another psychological theory of the origin of totemism has
been advanced by a Dutchman, G. A. Wilken [1884, 997]. It
connects totemism with the belief in the transmigration of souls.
‘The animal in which the souls of the dead are thought by preference to be incarnate becomes a kinsman, an ancestor, and as
such is revered.’1 It seems more likely, however, that the belief
in transmigration was derived from totemism than vice versa.
Yet another theory of totemism is held by some eminent
American ethnologists, Franz Boas, C. Hill-Tout, and others. It is
based upon observations on North American Indian totemic
clans and maintains that the totem was originally the guardian
spirit of an ancestor, who acquired it in a dream and transmitted
it to his descendants. We have already heard the diﬃculties
which stand in the way of the view that totems are inherited
from single individuals [cf. p. 129]; but apart from this, the
Australian evidence lends no support to the theory that totems
are derived from guardian spirits. (Frazer, 1910, 4, 48 ﬀ.)
The last of the psychological theories, that put forward by
Wundt (1912, 190), is based upon two facts. ‘In the ﬁrst place,
the original totem, and the one which continues to remain most
common, is the animal; and, secondly, the earliest totem animals
are identical with soul animals.’ [English translation, 192.] Soul
animals (such as birds, snakes, lizards and mice) are appropriate
receptacles of souls which have left the body, on account of their
rapid movements or ﬂight through the air or of other qualities
likely to produce surprise or alarm. Totem animals are derived
from the transformations of the ‘breath-soul’ into animals. Thus,
according to Wundt, totemism is directly connected with the
belief in spirits, that is to say with animism.
1

Quoted by Frazer (1910, 4, 45 f.).

the return of totemism in childhood

(b) and (c) The origin of exogamy and its relation
to totemism
I have set out the diﬀerent theories about totemism in some
detail. But even so, compression has been inevitable and I fear
that my account may have suﬀered in consequence. In what
follows, however, I shall venture, for my readers’ sake, to be still
more condensed. The discussions on the exogamy practised by
totemic peoples are, owing to the nature of the material with
which they deal, particularly complicated and diﬀuse—one
might even say confused. The purposes of the present work
make it possible for me to limit myself to tracing certain of the
main lines of dispute, while referring those who wish to enter
into the subject more deeply to the specialized writings from
which I have so frequently quoted.
The attitude taken by an author on the problems of exogamy
must naturally depend to some extent on the position he has
adopted towards the various theories of totemism. Some of the
explanations of totemism exclude any connection with
exogamy, so that the two institutions fall completely apart. Thus
we ﬁnd two opposing views: one which seeks to maintain the
original presumption that exogamy forms an inherent part of
the totemic system, and the other which denies that there is any
such connection and holds that the convergence between these
two features of the oldest cultures is a chance one. This latter
opinion has been adopted without qualiﬁcation by Frazer in his
later works: ‘I must request the reader to bear constantly in
mind’, he writes, ‘that the two institutions of totemism and
exogamy are fundamentally distinct in origin and nature,
though they have accidentally crossed and blended in many
tribes.’ (Frazer, 1910, 1, xii.) He gives an explicit warning that
the opposite view must be a source of endless diﬃculties and
misunderstandings.
Other writers have, on the contrary, found a means of

139

140 totem and taboo
regarding exogamy as an inevitable consequence of the basic
principles of totemism. Durkheim (1898, 1902 and 1905) has
put forward the view that the taboo attached to totems was
bound to involve prohibition against practising sexual intercourse with a woman of the same totem. The totem is of the
same blood as the man and consequently the ban upon shedding
blood (in connection with deﬂoration and menstruation) prohibits him from sexual relations with a woman belonging to his
totem.1 Andrew Lang (1905, 125), who agrees with Durkheim
on this subject, believes that the prohibition against women of
the same clan might operate even without any blood taboo. The
general totem taboo (which, for instance, forbids a man to
sit under his own totem tree) would, in Lang’s opinion, have
been suﬃcient. Incidentally, he complicates this with another
explanation of exogamy (see below [p. 146]) and omits to
show how the two explanations are related to each other.
As regards the chronological relations between the two
institutions, most of the authorities agree that totemism is the
older of them and that exogamy arose later.2
Of the theories which seek to show that exogamy is
independent of totemism I shall only draw attention to a few
which throw light on the attitude of the diﬀerent authors to the
problem of incest.
McLennan (1865) ingeniously inferred the existence of
exogamy from the vestiges of customs which seemed to indicate
the earlier practice of marriage by capture. He formed a hypothesis that in the earliest times it had been a general usage for men
to obtain their wives from another group and that marriage with
a woman of their own group gradually ‘came to be considered
See the criticisms of Durkheim’s views by Frazer (1910, 4, 100 ﬀ.).
See, for instance, Frazer (1910, 4, 75): ‘The totemic clan is a totally diﬀerent
social organism from the exogamous clan, and we have good grounds for
thinking that it is far older.’
1
2

the return of totemism in childhood

improper because it was unusual’ [ibid., 289]. He accounted for
the prevalence of exogamy by supposing that the practice of
killing the majority of female children at birth had led to a
scarcity of women in primitive societies. We are not here concerned with the question of how far these assumptions of
McLennan’s are supported by the actual ﬁndings. What interests
us far more is the fact that his hypotheses fail to explain why the
male members of a group should refuse themselves access to
the few remaining women of their own blood—the fact that
he entirely overlooks the problem of incest. (Frazer, 1910, 4,
71–92.)
Other students of exogamy, on the contrary, and evidently
with greater justice, have seen in exogamy an institution for the
prevention of incest.1 When one considers the gradually
increasing complication of the Australian restrictions upon marriage, it is impossible not to accept the opinions of Morgan
(1877), Frazer (1910, 4, 105 ﬀ.), Howitt [1904, 143] and
Baldwin Spencer that those regulations bear (in Frazer’s words)
‘the impress of deliberate design’ and that they aimed at achieving the result they have in fact achieved. ‘In no other way does it
seem possible to explain in all its details a system at once so
complex and so regular.’ (Frazer, ibid., 106.)
It is interesting to observe that the ﬁrst restrictions produced
by the introduction of marriage classes aﬀected the sexual freedom of the younger generation (that is, incest between brothers
and sisters and between sons and mothers) whereas incest
between fathers and daughters was only prevented by a further
extension of the regulations.
But the fact that exogamous sexual restrictions were imposed
intentionally throws no light on the motive which led to their
imposition. What is the ultimate source of the horror of incest
which must be recognized as the root of exogamy? To explain it
1

Cf. the ﬁrst essay in this book.

141

142 totem and taboo
by the existence of an instinctive dislike of sexual intercourse
with blood relatives—that is to say, by an appeal to the fact that
there is a horror of incest—is clearly unsatisfactory; for social
experience shows that, in spite of this supposed instinct, incest is
no uncommon event even in our present-day society, and history tells us of cases in which incestuous marriage between
privileged persons was actually the rule.
Westermarck (1906–8, 2, 368)1 has explained the horror of
incest on the ground that ‘there is an innate aversion to sexual
intercourse between persons living very closely together from
early youth, and that, as such persons are in most cases related by
blood, this feeling would naturally display itself in custom and
law as a horror of intercourse between near kin’. Havelock Ellis
[1914, 205 f.], though he disputed the instinctiveness of the
aversion, subscribed to this explanation in the main: ‘The normal failure of the pairing instinct to manifest itself in the case of
brothers and sisters, or of boys and girls brought up together
from infancy, is a merely negative phenomenon due to the
inevitable absence in those circumstances of the conditions
which evoke the pairing instinct. . . . Between those who have
been brought up together from childhood all the sensory stimuli
of vision, hearing and touch have been dulled by use, trained to
the calm level of aﬀection, and deprived of their potency to
arouse the erethistic excitement which produces sexual
tumescence.’
It seems to me very remarkable that Westermarck should consider that this innate aversion to sexual intercourse with those
with whom one has been intimate in childhood is also the
equivalent in psychical terms of the biological fact that inbreeding is detrimental to the species. A biological instinct of the kind
suggested would scarcely have gone so far astray in its psycho1

In the same chapter he replies to various objections which have been raised
against his views.

the return of totemism in childhood

logical expression that, instead of applying to blood-relatives
(intercourse with whom might be injurious to reproduction), it
aﬀected persons who were totally innocuous in this respect,
merely because they shared a common home. I cannot resist
referring, too, to Frazer’s admirable criticism of Westermarck’s
theory. Frazer ﬁnds it inexplicable that to-day there should be
scarcely any sexual aversion to intercourse with house-mates,
whereas the horror of incest, which on Westermarck’s theory is
only a derivative of that aversion, should have increased so
enormously. But some further comments of Frazer’s go deeper,
and these I shall reproduce in full, since they are in essential
agreement with the arguments which I put forward in my essay
on taboo:
‘It is not easy to see why any deep human instinct should need
to be reinforced by law. There is no law commanding men to eat
and drink or forbidding them to put their hands in the ﬁre. Men
eat and drink and keep their hands out of the ﬁre instinctively for
fear of natural not legal penalties, which would be entailed by
violence done to these instincts. The law only forbids men to do
what their instincts incline them to do; what nature itself
prohibits and punishes, it would be superﬂuous for the law to
prohibit and punish. Accordingly we may always safely assume
that crimes forbidden by law are crimes which many men have
a natural propensity to commit. If there was no such propensity
there would be no such crimes, and if no such crimes were
committed what need to forbid them? Instead of assuming,
therefore, from the legal prohibition of incest that there is a
natural aversion to incest, we ought rather to assume that there is
a natural instinct in favour of it, and that if the law represses it, as
it represses other natural instincts, it does so because civilized
men have come to the conclusion that the satisfaction of these
natural instincts is detrimental to the general interests of
society.’ (Frazer, 1910, 4, 97 f.)
I may add to these excellent arguments of Frazer’s that the

143

144 totem and taboo
ﬁndings of psycho-analysis make the hypothesis of an innate
aversion to incestuous intercourse totally untenable. They have
shown, on the contrary, that the earliest sexual excitations of
youthful human beings are invariably of an incestuous character
and that such impulses when repressed play a part that can
scarcely be over-estimated as motive forces of neuroses in later
life.
Thus the view which explains the horror of incest as an innate
instinct must be abandoned. Nor can anything more favourable
be said of another, widely held explanation of the law against
incest, according to which primitive peoples noticed at an
early date the dangers with which their race was threatened
by inbreeding and for that reason deliberately adopted the
prohibition. There are a host of objections to this theory. (Cf.
Durkheim, 1898 [33 ﬀ.].) Not only must the prohibition
against incest be older than any domestication of animals
which might have enabled men to observe the eﬀects of inbreeding upon racial characters, but even to-day the detrimental results of inbreeding are not established with certainty and
cannot easily be demonstrated in man. Moreover, everything that
we know of contemporary savages makes it highly improbable that their most remote ancestors were already
concerned with the question of preserving their later progeny
from injury. Indeed it is almost absurd to attribute to such
improvident creatures motives of hygiene and eugenics to which
consideration is scarcely paid in our own present-day
civilization.1
Lastly, account must be taken of the fact that a prohibition
against inbreeding, based upon practical motives of hygiene, on
the ground of its tending to racial enfeeblement, seems quite
inadequate to explain the profound abhorrence shown towards
1

Darwin [1875, 2, 127] writes of savages that they ‘are not likely to reﬂect on
distant evils to their progeny’.

the return of totemism in childhood

incest in our society. As I have shown elsewhere,1 this feeling
seems to be even more active and intense among contemporary
primitive peoples than among civilized ones.
It might have been expected that here again we should have
before us a choice between sociological, biological and psychological explanations. (In this connection the psychological
motives should perhaps be regarded as representing biological
forces.) Nevertheless, at the end of our inquiry, we can only
subscribe to Frazer’s resigned conclusion. We are ignorant of the
origin of the horror of incest and cannot even tell in what direction to look for it. None of the solutions of the enigma that have
been proposed seems satisfactory.2
I must, however, mention one other attempt at solving it. It is
of a kind quite diﬀerent from any that we have so far considered,
and might be described as ‘historical’.
This attempt is based upon an hypothesis of Charles Darwin’s
upon the social state of primitive men. Darwin deduced from
the habits of the higher apes that men, too, originally lived in
comparatively small groups or hordes3 within which the jealousy of the oldest and strongest male prevented sexual promiscuity. ‘We may indeed conclude from what we know of the
jealousy of all male quadrupeds, armed, as many of them are,
with special weapons for battling with their rivals, that
promiscuous intercourse in a state of nature is extremely
See the ﬁrst essay in this volume [p. 10].
‘Thus the ultimate origin of exogamy, and with it of the law of incest—since
exogamy was devised to prevent incest—remains a problem nearly as dark as
ever.’ (Frazer, 1910, 1, 165.)
3
‘ [Freud’s use, here and subsequently, of the word ‘horde’ may give rise to
confusion. In ordinary English usage ‘horde’ suggests a very large and
unorganized mass of people. The present context makes it plain that Freud uses
the word to denote a more or less organized group of limited size—what
Atkinson terms ‘the cyclopean family’.]
1
2

145

146 totem and taboo
improbable. . . . Therefore, if we look far enough back in the
stream of time, judging from the social habits of man as he now
exists . . . the most probable view is that primæval man aboriginally lived in small communities, each with as many wives as
he could support and obtain, whom he would have jealously
guarded against all other men. Or he may have lived with several
wives by himself, like the Gorilla; for all the natives “agree that
but one adult male is seen in a band; when the young male
grows up, a contest takes place for mastery, and the strongest, by
killing and driving out the others, establishes himself as the head
of the community.” (Dr. Savage, in Boston Journal of Nat. Hist., vol. v,
1845–7, p. 423.) The younger males, being thus expelled and
wandering about, would, when at last successful in ﬁnding a
partner, prevent too close interbreeding within the limits of the
same family.’ (Darwin, 1871, 2, 362 f.)
Atkinson (1903) seems to have been the ﬁrst to realize that
the practical consequence of the conditions obtaining in
Darwin’s primal horde must be exogamy for the young males.
Each of them might, after being driven out, establish a similar
horde, in which the same prohibition upon sexual intercourse
would rule owing to its leader’s jealousy. In course of time this
would produce what grew into a conscious law: ‘No sexual relations between those who share a common home.’ After the establishment of totemism this regulation would assume another
form and would run: ‘No sexual relations within the totem.’
Andrew Lang (1905, 114 and 143) accepted this explanation
of exogamy. In the same volume, however, he supports the other
theory (held by Durkheim), according to which exogamy was a
resultant of the totemic laws. [Cf. p. 139.] It is a little diﬃcult to
bring these two points of view into harmony: according to the
ﬁrst theory exogamy would have originated before totemism,
while according to the second it would have been derived from it.1
1

‘If it be granted that exogamy existed in practice, on the lines of Mr. Darwin’s
theory, before the totem beliefs lent to the practice a sacred sanction, our task is

the return of totemism in childhood

(3)
Into this obscurity one single ray of light is thrown by psychoanalytic observation.
There is a great deal of resemblance between the relations of
children and of primitive men towards animals. Children show
no trace of the arrogance which urges adult civilized men to
draw a hard-and-fast line between their own nature and that of
all other animals. Children have no scruples over allowing animals to rank as their full equals. Uninhibited as they are in the
avowal of their bodily needs, they no doubt feel themselves
more akin to animals than to their elders, who may well be a
puzzle to them.
Not infrequently, however, a strange rift occurs in the
excellent relations between children and animals. A child will
suddenly begin to be frightened of some particular species of
animal and to avoid touching or seeing any individual of that
species. The clinical picture of an animal phobia emerges—a
very common, and perhaps the earliest, form of psycho-neurotic
illness occurring in childhood. As a rule the phobia is attached
to animals in which the child has hitherto shown a specially
lively interest and it has nothing to do with any particular
individual animal. There is no large choice of animals that may
become objects of a phobia in the case of children living in
relatively easy. The ﬁrst practical rule would be that of the jealous Sire, “No
males to touch the females in my camp”, with expulsion of adolescent sons. In
eﬄux of time that rule, become habitual, would be, “No marriage within the local
group”. Next, let the local groups receive names, such as Emus, Crows, Opossums, Snipes, and the rule becomes, “No marriage within the local group of
animal name; no Snipe to marry Snipe.” But, if the primal groups were not
exogamous, they would become so, as soon as totemic myths and tabus were
developed out of the animal, vegetable, and other names of local groups.’
(Lang, 1905, 143.) (The italics in the middle of this passage are mine.) In his last
discussion of this subject, moreover, Lang (1911 [404]) states that he has ‘abandoned the idea that exogamy is a consequence of the general totemic taboo’.

147

148 totem and taboo
towns: horses, dogs, cats, less often birds, and with striking
frequency very small creatures such as beetles and butterﬂies.
The senseless and immoderate fear shown in these phobias is
sometimes attached to animals only known to the child from
picture books and fairy tales. On a few rare occasions it is possible to discover what has led to an unusual choice of this kind;
and I have to thank Karl Abraham for telling me of a case in
which the child himself explained that his fear of wasps was due
to their colour and stripes reminding him of tigers, which from
all accounts were beasts to be feared.1
No detailed analytic examination has yet been made of children’s animal phobias, though they would greatly repay study.
This neglect has no doubt been due to the diﬃculty of analysing
children of such a tender age. It cannot therefore be claimed that
we know the general meaning of these disorders and I myself am
of the opinion that this may not turn out to be of a uniform
nature. But a few cases of phobias of this kind directed towards
the larger animals have proved accessible to analysis and have
thus yielded their secret to the investigator. It was the same in
every case: where the children concerned were boys, their fear
related at bottom to their father and had merely been displaced
on to the animal.
Everyone with psycho-analytic experience will no doubt have
come across cases of the sort and have derived the same impression from them. Yet I can quote only a few detailed publications
on the subject. This paucity of literature is an accidental circumstance and it must not be supposed that our conclusions are
based on a few scattered observations. I may mention, for
instance, a writer who has studied the neuroses of childhood
with great understanding—Dr. M. Wulﬀ, of Odessa.2 In the
course of a case-history of a nine-year-old boy he reports that at
1
2

[Subsequently published. (Abraham, 1914, 82; English translation, 228.)]
[Later Dr. M. Woolf of Tel-Aviv.]

the return of totemism in childhood

the age of four the patient had suﬀered from a dog-phobia.
‘When he saw a dog running past in the street, he would weep
and call out: “Dear doggie, don’t bite me! I’ll be good!” By
“being good” he meant “not playing on the ﬁddle” ’—not masturbating. (Wulﬀ, 1912, 15.) ‘The boy’s dog-phobia’, the author
explains, ‘was in reality his fear of his father displaced on to
dogs; for his curious exclamation “Doggie, I’ll be good!”—that
is, “I won’t masturbate”—was directed to his father, who had
forbidden him to masturbate.’ Wulﬀ adds a footnote which is in
complete agreement with my views and at the same time bears
witness to the frequent occurrence of such experiences: ‘Phobias
of this type (phobias of horses, dogs, cats, fowls and other
domestic animals) are, in my opinion, at least as common in
childhood as pavor nocturnus; and in analysis they almost invariably
turn out to be a displacement on to the animals of the child’s
fear of one of his parents. I should not be prepared to maintain
that the same mechanism applies to the widespread phobias of
rats and mice.’ [Ibid., 16.]
I recently published (1909a) an ‘Analysis of a Phobia in a
Five-Year-Old Boy’, the material of which was supplied to me by
the little patient’s father. The boy had a phobia of horses, and as a
result he refused to go out in the street. He expressed a fear that
the horse would come into the room and bite him; and it turned
out that this must be the punishment for a wish that the horse
might fall down (that is, die). After the boy’s fear of his father
had been removed by reassurances, it became evident that he
was struggling against wishes which had as their subject the idea
of his father being absent (going away on a journey, dying). He
regarded his father (as he made all too clear) as a competitor for
the favours of his mother, towards whom the obscure foreshadowings of his budding sexual wishes were aimed. Thus he was
situated in the typical attitude of a male child towards his parents
to which we have given the name of the ‘Œdipus complex’ and
which we regard in general as the nuclear complex of the

149

150 totem and taboo
neuroses. The new fact that we have learnt from the analysis of
‘little Hans’—a fact with an important bearing upon
totemism—is that in such circumstances children displace some
of their feelings from their father on to an animal.
Analysis is able to trace the associative paths along which this
displacement passes—both the fortuitous paths and those with a
signiﬁcant content. Analysis also enables us to discover the motives
for the displacement. The hatred of his father that arises in a boy
from rivalry for his mother is not able to achieve uninhibited
sway over his mind; it has to contend against his old-established
aﬀection and admiration for the very same person. The child
ﬁnds relief from the conﬂict arising out of this double-sided,
this ambivalent emotional attitude towards his father by displacing his hostile and fearful feelings on to a substitute for his
father. The displacement cannot, however, bring the conﬂict to
an end, it cannot eﬀect a clear-cut severance between the
aﬀectionate and the hostile feelings. On the contrary, the conﬂict
is resumed in relation to the object on to which the displacement has been made: the ambivalence is extended to it. There
could be no doubt that little Hans was not only frightened of
horses; he also approached them with admiration and interest.
As soon as his anxiety began to diminish, he identiﬁed himself
with the dreaded creature: he began to jump about like a horse
and in his turn bit his father.1 At another stage in the resolution
of his phobia he did not hesitate to identify his parents with
some other large animals.2
It may fairly be said that in these children’s phobias some of
the features of totemism reappear, but reversed into their negative. We are, however, indebted to Ferenczi (1913a) for an interesting history of a single case which can only be described as an
instance of positive totemism in a child. It is true that in the case of
1
2

Freud (1909a [English translation, 194]).
In his giraﬀe phantasy (ibid., 179–82].

the return of totemism in childhood

little Árpád (the subject of Ferenczi’s report) his totemic interests did not arise in direct relation with his Œdipus complex but
on the basis of its narcissistic precondition, the fear of castration.
But any attentive reader of the story of little Hans will ﬁnd
abundant evidence that he, too, admired his father as possessing
a big penis and feared him as threatening his own. The same part
is played by the father alike in the Œdipus and the castration
complexes—the part of a dreaded enemy to the sexual interests
of childhood. The punishment which he threatens is castration,
or its substitute, blinding.1
When little Árpád was two and a half years old, he had once,
while he was on a summer holiday, tried to micturate into the
fowl-house and a fowl had bitten or snapped at his penis. A year
later, when he was back in the same place, he himself turned into
a fowl; his one interest was in the fowl-house and in what went
on there and he abandoned human speech in favour of cackling
and crowing. At the time at which the observation was made
(when he was ﬁve years old) he had recovered his speech, but
his interests and his talk were entirely concerned with chickens
and other kinds of poultry. They were his only toys and he only
sang songs that had some mention of fowls in them. His attitude
towards his totem animal was superlatively ambivalent: he
showed both hatred and love to an extravagant degree. His
favourite game was playing slaughtering fowls. ‘The slaughtering of poultry was a regular festival for him. He would dance
round the animals’ bodies for hours at a time in a state of intense
excitement.’2 But afterwards he would kiss and stroke the
slaughtered animal or would clean and caress the toy fowls that
he had himself ill-treated.
1

For the substitution of blinding for castration—a substitution that occurs,
too, in the myth of Œdipus—see Reitler (1913), Ferenczi (1913b), Rank
(1913) and Eder (1913).
2
[Ferenczi, 1913a (English translation, 246.)]

151

152 totem and taboo
Little Árpád himself saw to it that the meaning of his strange
behaviour should not remain hidden. From time to time he
translated his wishes from the totemic language into that of
everyday life. ‘My father’s the cock’, he said on one occasion,
and another time: ‘Now I’m small, now I’m a chicken. When I
get bigger I’ll be a fowl. When I’m bigger still I’ll be a cock.’ On
another occasion he suddenly said he would like to eat some
‘fricassee of mother’ (on the analogy of fricassee of chicken).
[Ibid., 249.] He was very generous in threatening other people
with castration, just as he himself had been threatened with it for
his masturbatory activities.
There was no doubt, according to Ferenczi, as to the sources
of Árpád’s interest in events in the poultry-yard: ‘the continual
sexual activity between the cock and hens, the laying of eggs and
the hatching out of the young brood’ gratiﬁed his sexual curiosity, the real object of which was human family-life. [Ibid., 250.]
He showed that he had formed his own choice of sexual objects
on the model of life in the hen-run, for he said one day to the
neighbour’s wife: ‘I’ll marry you and your sister and my three
cousins and the cook; no, not the cook, I’ll marry my mother
instead.’ [Ibid., 252.]
Later on we shall be able to assess the worth of this observation more completely. At the moment I will only emphasize two
features in it which oﬀer valuable points of agreement with
totemism: the boy’s complete identiﬁcation with his totem animal1 and his ambivalent emotional attitude to it. These observations justify us, in my opinion, in substituting the father for the
totem animal in the formula for totemism (in the case of males).
It will be observed that there is nothing new or particularly
daring in this step forward. Indeed, primitive men say the very
same thing themselves, and, where the totemic system is still in
1

This, according to Frazer (1910, 4, 5), constitutes ‘the whole essence of
totemism’: ‘totemism is an identiﬁcation of a man with his totem.’

the return of totemism in childhood

force to-day, they describe the totem as their common ancestor
and primal father. All we have done is to take at its literal value an
expression used by these people, of which the anthropologists
have been able to make very little and which they have therefore
been glad to keep in the background. Psycho-analysis, on the
contrary, leads us to put special stress upon this same point and
to take it as the starting-point of our attempt at explaining
totemism.1
The ﬁrst consequence of our substitution is most remarkable.
If the totem animal is the father, then the two principal ordinances of totemism, the two taboo prohibitions which constitute
its core—not to kill the totem and not to have sexual relations
with a woman of the same totem—coincide in their content
with the two crimes of Œdipus, who killed his father and married his mother, as well as with the two primal wishes of children, the insuﬃcient repression or the re-awakening of which
forms the nucleus of perhaps every psychoneurosis. If this equation is anything more than a misleading trick of chance, it must
enable us to throw a light upon the origin of totemism in the
inconceivably remote past. In other words, it would enable us to
make it probable that the totemic system—like little Hans’s animal phobia and little Árpád’s poultry perversion—was a product
of the conditions involved in the Œdipus complex. In order to
pursue this possibility, we shall have, in the following pages, to
study a feature of the totemic system (or, as we might say, of the
totemic religion) which I have hitherto scarcely found an
opportunity of mentioning.

1

I have to thank Otto Rank for bringing to my notice a dog-phobia in an
intelligent young man. His explanation of the way in which he acquired his
illness sounds markedly like the totemic theory of the Arunta which I mentioned on page 133: he thought he had heard from his father that his mother
had had a severe fright from a dog during her pregnancy.

153

154 totem and taboo

(4)
William Robertson Smith, who died in 1894—physicist,
philologist, Bible critic and archæologist—was a man of manysided interests, clear-sighted and liberal-minded. In his book on
the Religion of the Semites (ﬁrst published in 1889)1 he put forward
the hypothesis that a peculiar ceremony known as the ‘totem
meal’ had from the very ﬁrst formed an integral part of the
totemic system. At that time he had only a single piece of evidence in support of his theory: an account of a procedure of the
kind dating from the ﬁfth century .. But by an analysis of the
nature of sacriﬁce among the ancient Semites he was able to lend
his hypothesis a high degree of probability. Since sacriﬁce
implies a divinity, it was a question of arguing back from a
comparatively high phase of religious ritual to the lowest one,
that is, to totemism.
I will now attempt to extract from Robertson Smith’s admirable work those of his statements on the origin and meaning of
the ritual of sacriﬁce which are of decisive interest for us. In
so doing I must omit all the details, often so fascinating, and
neglect all the later developments. It is quite impossible for an
epitome such as this to give my readers any notion of the
lucidity and convincing force of the original.
Robertson Smith [1894, 214] explains that sacriﬁce at the
altar was the essential feature in the ritual of ancient religions. It
plays the same part in all religions, so that its origin must be
traced back to very general causes, operating everywhere in the
same manner. Sacriﬁce—the sacred act par excellence (sacriﬁcium,
ερουργα)—originally had a somewhat diﬀerent meaning,
however, from its later one of making an oﬀering to the deity in
order to propitiate him or gain his favour. (The non-religious
1

[The second and revised edition, which is the one here quoted, appeared
posthumously in 1894.]

the return of totemism in childhood

usage of the word followed from this subsidiary sense of
‘renunciation’. [See below, p. 174.]) It can be shown that, to
begin with, sacriﬁce was nothing other than ‘an act of fellowship between the deity and his worshippers’. [Ibid., 224.]
The materials oﬀered for sacriﬁce were things that can be
eaten or drunk; men sacriﬁced to their deity the things on which
they themselves lived: ﬂesh, cereals, fruit, wine and oil. Only in
the case of ﬂesh were there limitations and exceptions. The god
shared the animal sacriﬁces with his worshippers, the vegetable
oﬀerings were for him alone. There is no doubt that animal
sacriﬁces were the older and were originally the only ones. Vegetable sacriﬁces arose from the oﬀering of ﬁrst-fruits and were in
the nature of a tribute to the lord of the earth and of the land; but
animal sacriﬁces are more ancient than agriculture. [Ibid., 222.]
Linguistic survivals make it certain that the portion of the
sacriﬁce allotted to the god was originally regarded as being
literally his food. As the nature of gods grew progressively less
material, this conception became a stumbling-block. It was
avoided by assigning to the deity only the liquid part of the meal.
Later, the use of ﬁre, which caused the ﬂesh of the sacriﬁce upon
the altar to rise in smoke, aﬀorded a method of dealing with
human food more appropriate to the divine mature. [Ibid., 224,
229.] The drink-oﬀering consisted originally of the blood of the
animal victim. This was later replaced by wine. In ancient times
wine was regarded as ‘the blood of the grape’, and it has been so
described by modern poets. [Ibid., 230.]
The oldest form of sacriﬁce, then, older than the use of ﬁre or
the knowledge of agriculture, was the sacriﬁce of animals,
whose ﬂesh and blood were enjoyed in common by the god and
his worshippers. It was essential that each one of the participants
should have his share of the meal.
A sacriﬁce of this kind was a public ceremony, a festival celebrated by the whole clan. Religion in general was an aﬀair of the
community and religious duty was a part of social obligation.

155

156 totem and taboo
Everywhere a sacriﬁce involves a feast and a feast cannot be
celebrated without a sacriﬁce. The sacriﬁcial feast was an
occasion on which individuals rose joyously above their own
interests and stressed the mutual dependence existing between
one another and their god. [Ibid., 255.]
The ethical force of the public sacriﬁcial meal rested upon
very ancient ideas of the signiﬁcance of eating and drinking
together. Eating and drinking with a man was a symbol and a
conﬁrmation of fellowship and mutual social obligations. What
was directly expressed by the sacriﬁcial meal was only the fact that
the god and his worshippers were ‘commensals’,1 but every
other point in their mutual relations was included in this. Customs still in force among the Arabs of the desert show that
what is binding in a common meal is not a religious factor but
the act of eating itself. Anyone who has eaten the smallest morsel of food with one of these Bedouin or has swallowed a
mouthful of his milk need no longer fear him as an enemy but
may feel secure in his protection and help. Not, however, for
an unlimited time; strictly speaking, only so long as the
food which has been eaten in common remains in the body.
Such was the realistic view of the bond of union. It needed
repetition in order to be conﬁrmed and made permanent. [Ibid.,
269–70.]
But why is this binding force attributed to eating and drinking
together? In primitive societies there was only one kind of bond
which was absolute and inviolable—that of kinship. The solidarity of such a fellowship was complete. ‘A kin was a group of
persons whose lives were so bound up together, in what must be
called a physical unity, that they could be treated as parts of one
common life. . . . In a case of homicide Arabian tribesmen do
not say, “The blood of M. or N. has been spilt”, naming the man;
they say, “Our blood has been spilt”. In Hebrew the phrase by
1

[I.e. that they sat at one table.]

the return of totemism in childhood

which one claims kinship is “I am your bone and your ﬂesh”. ’
Thus kinship implies participation in a common substance. It is
therefore natural that it is not merely based on the fact that a man
is a part of his mother’s substance, having been born of her and
having been nourished by her milk, but that it can be acquired
and strengthened by food which a man eats later and with which
his body is renewed. If a man shared a meal with his god he was
expressing a conviction that they were of one substance; and he
would never share a meal with one whom he regarded as a
stranger. [Ibid., 273–5.]
The sacriﬁcial meal, then, was originally a feast of kinsmen, in
accordance with the law that only kinsmen eat together. In our
own society the members of a family have their meals in common; but the sacriﬁcial meal bears no relation to the family.
Kinship is an older thing than family life, and in the most primitive societies known to us the family contained members of
more than one kindred. The man married a woman of another
clan and the children inherited their mother’s clan; so that there
was no communion of kin between the man and the other
members of the family. In a family of such a kind there was no
common meal. To this day, savages eat apart and alone and the
religious food prohibitions of totemism often make it impossible for them to eat in common with their wives and children.
[Ibid., 277–8.]
Let us now turn to the sacriﬁcial animal. As we have heard,
there is no gathering of a clan without an animal sacriﬁce, nor—
and this now becomes signiﬁcant—any slaughter of an animal
except upon these ceremonial occasions. While game and the
milk of domestic animals might be consumed without any
qualms, religious scruples made it impossible to kill a domestic
animal for private purposes. [Ibid., 280, 281.] There cannot be
the slightest doubt, says Robertson Smith, that the slaughter of a
victim was originally among the acts which ‘are illegal to an
individual, and can only be justiﬁed when the whole clan shares

157

158 totem and taboo
the responsibility of the deed.1 So far as I know, there is only
one class of actions recognized by early nations to which this
description applies, viz. actions which involve an invasion of the
sanctity of the tribal blood. In fact, a life which no single tribesman is allowed to invade, and which can be sacriﬁced only by
the consent and common action of the kin, stands on the same
footing with the life of the fellow-tribesman.’ The rule that
every participant at the sacriﬁcial meal must eat a share of the
ﬂesh of the victim has the same meaning as the provision that
the execution of a guilty tribesman must be carried out by the
tribe as a whole. [Ibid., 284–5.] In other words, the sacriﬁcial
animal was treated as a member of the tribe; the sacriﬁcing
community, the god and the sacriﬁcial animal were of the same
blood and members of one clan.2
Robertson Smith brings forward copious evidence for identifying the sacriﬁcial animal with the primitive totem animal. In
later antiquity there were two classes of sacriﬁce: one in which
the victims were domestic animals of the kinds habitually used
for eating, and the other extraordinary sacriﬁces of animals
which were unclean and whose consumption was forbidden.
Investigation shows that these unclean animals were sacred animals, that they were oﬀered as sacriﬁces to the gods to whom
they were sacred, that originally they were identical with the
gods themselves, and that by means of the sacriﬁce the worshippers in some way laid stress upon their blood kinship with the
animal and the god. [Ibid., 290–5.] But in still earlier times this
distinction between ordinary and ‘mystic’ sacriﬁces disappears.
Originally all [sacriﬁcial] animals were sacred, their ﬂesh was
forbidden meat and might only be consumed on ceremonial
occasions and with the participation of the whole clan. The
slaughter of [such] an animal was equivalent to a shedding of
1
2

[This sentence is printed in spaced type by Freud.]
[The last clause is in spaced type in the original.)

the return of totemism in childhood

the tribal blood and could occur subject only to the same precautions and the same insurances against incurring reproach. [Ibid.,
312, 313.]
The domestication of animals and the introduction of cattlebreeding seems everywhere to have brought to an end the strict
and unadulterated totemism of primæval days.1 But such sacred
character as remained to domestic animals under what had then
become ‘pastoral’ religion is obvious enough to allow us to infer
its original totemic nature. Even in late classical times ritual prescribed in many places that the sacriﬁcial priest must take to
ﬂight after performing the sacriﬁce, as though to escape retribution. The idea that slaughtering oxen was a crime must at one
time have prevailed generally in Greece. At the Athenian festival
of Buphonia [‘ox-murder’] a regular trial was instituted after the
sacriﬁce, and all the participants were called as witnesses. At the
end of it, it was agreed that the responsibility for the murder
should be placed upon the knife; and this was accordingly cast
into the sea. [Smith, 1894, 304.]
In spite of the ban protecting the lives of sacred animals in
their quality of fellow-clansmen, a necessity arose for killing one
of them from time to time in solemn communion and for dividing its ﬂesh and blood among the members of the clan. The
compelling motive for this deed reveals the deepest meaning of
the nature of sacriﬁce. We have heard how in later times, whenever food is eaten in common, the participation in the same
substance establishes a sacred bond between those who consume
it when it has entered their bodies. In ancient times this result
seems only to have been eﬀected by participation in the substance of a sacrosanct victim. The holy mystery of sacriﬁcial death
‘is justiﬁed by the consideration that only in this way can the
1

‘The inference is that the domestication to which totemism inevitably leads
(when there are any animals capable of domestication) is fatal to totemism.’
(Jevons, 1902, 120.)

159

160 totem and taboo
sacred cement be procured which creates or keeps alive a living
bond of union between the worshippers and their god’.1 (Ibid.,
313.)
This bond is nothing else than the life of the sacriﬁcial animal,
which resides in its ﬂesh and in its blood and is distributed
among all the participants in the sacriﬁcial meal. A notion of this
kind lies at the root of all the blood covenants by which men
made compacts with each other even at a late period of history.
[Loc. cit.] This completely literal way of regarding bloodkinship as identity of substance makes it easy to understand the
necessity for renewing it from time to time by the physical
process of the sacriﬁcial meal. [Ibid., 319.]
At this point I will interrupt my survey of Robertson Smith’s
line of thought and restate the gist of it in the most concise
terms. With the establishment of the idea of private property
sacriﬁce came to be looked upon as a gift to the deity, as a
transference of property from men to the god. But this interpretation left unexplained all the peculiarities of the ritual of sacriﬁce. In the earliest times the sacriﬁcial animal had itself been
sacred and its life untouchable; it might only be killed if all the
members of the clan participated in the deed and shared their
guilt in the presence of the god, so that the sacred substance
could be yielded up and consumed by the clansmen and thus
ensure their identity with one another and with the deity. The
sacriﬁce was a sacrament and the sacriﬁcial animal was itself a
member of the clan. It was in fact the ancient totem animal, the
primitive god himself, by the killing and consuming of which
the clansmen renewed and assured their likeness to the god.
From this analysis of the nature of sacriﬁce Robertson Smith
draws the conclusion that the periodic killing and eating of the
totem in times before the worship of anthropomorphic deities2
1
2

[This sentence is printed in spaced type by Freud.]
[The last six words are in spaced type in the original.]

the return of totemism in childhood

had been an important element in totemic religion. [Ibid., 295.]
The ceremonial of a totem meal of this kind is, he suggests, to be
found in a description of a sacriﬁce of comparatively late date. St.
Nilus records a sacriﬁcial ritual current among the Bedouin of
the Sinai Desert at the end of the fourth century .. The victim
of the sacriﬁce, a camel, ‘is bound upon a rude altar of stones
piled together, and when the leader of the band has thrice led the
worshippers round the altar in a solemn procession accompanied with chants, he inﬂicts the ﬁrst wound . . . and in all
haste drinks of the blood that gushes forth. Forthwith the whole
company fall on the victim with their swords, hacking oﬀ pieces
of the quivering ﬂesh and devouring them raw with such wild
haste, that in the short interval between the rise of the day star1
which marked the hour for the service to begin, and the disappearance of its rays before the rising sun, the entire camel, body
and bones, skin, blood and entrails, is wholly devoured.’ [Ibid.,
338.] All the evidence goes to show that this barbaric ritual,
which bears every sign of extreme antiquity, was no isolated
instance but was everywhere the original form taken by totemic
sacriﬁce, though later toned down in many diﬀerent directions.
Many authorities have refused to attach importance to the
concept of the totem meal, because it was not supported by any
direct observation at the level of totemism. Robertson Smith
himself pointed to instances in which the sacramental signiﬁcance of the sacriﬁce seemed to be assured: for instance, the
human sacriﬁces of the Aztecs, and others which recall the circumstances of the totem meal—the sacriﬁce of bears by the Bear
clan of the Ouataouak [Otawa] tribe in America and the bear
feast of the Aino in Japan. [Ibid., 295 n.] These and similar cases
have been reported in detail by Frazer in the Fifth Part of his
great work (1912, 2 [Chaps. X, XIII, XIV]). An American Indian
tribe in California, which worship a large bird of prey (a
1

To which the sacriﬁce was oﬀered.

161

162 totem and taboo
buzzard), kill it once a year at a solemn festival, after which it is
mourned and its skin and feathers are preserved. [Ibid., 2, 170.]
The Zuni Indians of New Mexico behave in a similar way to their
sacred turtles. [Ibid., 2, 175.]
A feature has been observed in the intichiuma ceremonies of the
Central Australian tribes which agrees admirably with Robertson
Smith’s conjectures. Each clan, when it is performing magic for
the multiplication of its totem (which it itself is normally prohibited from consuming), is obliged during the ceremony to eat
a small portion of its own totem before making it accessible to
the other clans. [Frazer, 1910, l, 110 ﬀ.] According to Frazer
(Ibid., 2, 590) the clearest example of a sacramental consumption of an otherwise prohibited totem is to be found among the
Bini of West Africa in connection with their funeral ceremonies.
Accordingly, I propose that we should adopt Robertson
Smith’s hypothesis that the sacramental killing and communal
eating of the totem animal, whose consumption was forbidden
on all other occasions, was an important feature of totemic
religion.1

(5)
Let us call up the spectacle of a totem meal of the kind we have
been discussing, ampliﬁed by a few probable features which we
have not yet been able to consider. The clan is celebrating the
ceremonial occasion by the cruel slaughter of its totem animal
and is devouring it raw—blood, ﬂesh and bones. The clansmen
are there, dressed in the likeness of the totem and imitating it in
sound and movement, as though they are seeking to stress their
1

I am not unaware of the objections to this theory of sacriﬁce which have
been brought forward by various writers (such as Marillier [1898, 204 ﬀ.],
Hubert and Mauss [1899, 30 ﬀ.], etc.); but they have not diminished to any
important extent the impression produced by Robertson Smith’s hypothesis.

the return of totemism in childhood

identity with it. Each man is conscious that he is performing an
act forbidden to the individual and justiﬁable only through the
participation of the whole clan; nor may anyone absent himself
from the killing and the meal. When the deed is done, the
slaughtered animal is lamented and bewailed. The mourning is
obligatory, imposed by dread of a threatened retribution. As
Robertson Smith (1894, 412) remarks of an analogous occasion,
its chief purpose is to disclaim responsibility for the killing.
But the mourning is followed by demonstrations of festive
rejoicing: every instinct is unfettered and there is licence for
every kind of gratiﬁcation. Here we have easy access to an understanding of the nature of festivals in general. A festival is a permitted, or rather an obligatory, excess, a solemn breach of a
prohibition. It is not that men commit the excesses because they
are feeling happy as a result of some injunction they have
received. It is rather that excess is of the essence of a festival; the
festive feeling is produced by the liberty to do what is as a rule
prohibited.
What are we to make, though, of the prelude to this festive
joy—the mourning over the death of the animal? If the clansmen rejoice over the killing of the totem—a normally forbidden
act—why do they mourn over it as well?
As we have seen, the clansmen acquire sanctity by consuming
the totem: they reinforce their identiﬁcation with it and with
one another. Their festive feelings and all that follows from them
might well be explained by the fact that they have taken into
themselves the sacred life of which the substance of the totem is
the vehicle.
Psycho-analysis has revealed that the totem animal is in reality
a substitute for the father; and this tallies with the contradictory
fact that, though the killing of the animal is as a rule forbidden,
yet its killing becomes a festive occasion—the fact that it is killed
and yet mourned. The ambivalent emotional attitude, which to
this day characterizes the father-complex in our children and

163

164 totem and taboo
which often persists into adult life, seems to extend to the totem
animal in its capacity as substitute for the father.
If, now, we bring together the psycho-analytic translation of
the totem with the fact of the totem meal and with Darwin’s
theories of the earliest state of human society, the possibility of a
deeper understanding emerges—a glimpse of a hypothesis
which may seem fantastic but which oﬀers the advantage of
establishing an unsuspected correlation between groups of
phenomena that have hitherto been disconnected.
There is, of course, no place for the beginnings of totemism in
Darwin’s primal horde. All that we ﬁnd there is a violent and
jealous father who keeps all the females for himself and drives
away his sons as they grow up. This earliest state of society has
never been an object of observation. The most primitive kind of
organization that we actually come across—and one that is in
force to this day in certain tribes—consists of bands of males;
these bands are composed of members with equal rights and are
subject to the restrictions of the totemic system, including
inheritance through the mother. Can this form of organization
have developed out of the other one? and if so along what lines?
If we call the celebration of the totem meal to our help, we
shall be able to ﬁnd an answer. One day1 the brothers who had
been driven out came together, killed and devoured their father
and so made an end of the patriarchal horde. United, they had
the courage to do and succeeded in doing what would have been
impossible for them individually. (Some cultural advance, perhaps, command over some new weapon, had given them a sense
of superior strength.) Cannibal savages as they were, it goes
without saying that they devoured their victim as well as killing
him. The violent primal father had doubtless been the feared and
1

To avoid possible misunderstanding, I must ask the reader to take into
account the ﬁnal sentences of the following footnote as a corrective to this
description.

the return of totemism in childhood

envied model of each one of the company of brothers: and in the
act of devouring him they accomplished their identiﬁcation with
him, and each one of them acquired a portion of his strength.
The totem meal, which is perhaps mankind’s earliest festival,
would thus be a repetition and a commemoration of this memorable and criminal deed, which was the beginning of so many
things—of social organization, of moral restrictions and of
religion.1
1

This hypothesis, which has such a monstrous air, of the tyrannical father
being overwhelmed and killed by a combination of his exiled sons was also
arrived at by Atkinson (1903, 220 f.) as a direct implication of the state of
aﬀairs in Darwin’s primal horde: ‘The patriarch had only one enemy whom he
should dread . . . a youthful band of brothers living together in forced celibacy,
or at most in polyandrous relation with some single female captive. A horde as
yet weak in their impubescence they are, but they would, when strength was
gained with time, inevitably wrench by combined attacks, renewed again and
again, both wife and life from the paternal tyrant.’ Atkinson, who incidentally
passed his whole life in New Caledonia and had unusual opportunities for
studying the natives, also pointed out that the conditions which Darwin
assumed to prevail in the primal horde may easily be observed in herds of wild
oxen and horses and regularly lead to the killing of the father of the herd.
[Ibid., 222 f.] He further supposed that, after the father had been disposed of,
the horde would be disintegrated by a bitter struggle between the victorious
sons. Thus any new organization of society would be precluded: there would
be ‘an ever-recurring violent succession to the solitary paternal tyrant, by sons
whose parricidal hands were so soon again clenched in fratricidal strife.’ (Ibid.,
228.) Atkinson, who had no psycho-analytic hints to help him and who was
ignorant of Robertson Smith’s studies, found a less violent transition from the
primal horde to the next social stage, at which numbers of males live together
in a peaceable community. He believed that through the intervention of maternal love the sons—to begin with only the youngest, but later others as well—
were allowed to remain with the horde, and that in return for this toleration
the sons acknowledged their father’s sexual privilege by renouncing all claim
to their mother and sisters. [Ibid., 231 ﬀ.]
Such is the highly remarkable theory put forward by Atkinson. In its essential feature it is in agreement with my own; but its divergence results in its
failing to eﬀect a correlation with many other issues.
The lack of precision in what I have written in the text above, its abbreviation

165

166 totem and taboo
In order that these latter consequences may seem plausible,
leaving their premises on one side, we need only suppose that
the tumultuous mob of brothers were ﬁlled with the same contradictory feelings which we can see at work in the ambivalent
father-complexes of our children and of our neurotic patients.
They hated their father, who presented such a formidable obstacle to their craving for power and their sexual desires; but they
loved and admired him too. After they had got rid of him, had
satisﬁed their hatred and had put into eﬀect their wish to identify themselves with him, the aﬀection which had all this time
been pushed under was bound to make itself felt.1 It did so in
the form of remorse. A sense of guilt made its appearance, which
in this instance coincided with the remorse felt by the whole
group. The dead father became stronger than the living one had
been—for events took the course we so often see them follow in
human aﬀairs to this day. What had up to then been prevented
by his actual existence was thenceforward prohibited by the sons
themselves, in accordance with the psychological procedure so
familiar to us in psycho-analyses under the name of ‘deferred
obedience’. They revoked their deed by forbidding the killing of
the totem, the substitute for their father; and they renounced its
fruits by resigning their claim to the women who had now been
set free. They thus created out of their ﬁlial sense of guilt the two
fundamental taboos of totemism, which for that very reason
of the time factor and its compression of the whole subject-matter, may be
attributed to the reserve necessitated by the nature of the topic. It would be as
foolish to aim at exactitude in such questions as it would be unfair to insist
upon certainty.
1

This fresh emotional attitude must also have been assisted by the fact that
the deed cannot have given complete satisfaction to those who did it. From
one point of view it had been done in vain. Not one of the sons had in fact
been able to put his original wish—of taking his father’s place—into eﬀect.
And, as we know, failure is far more propitious for a moral reaction than
satisfaction.

the return of totemism in childhood

inevitably corresponded to the two repressed wishes of the
Œdipus complex. Whoever contravened those taboos became
guilty of the only two crimes with which primitive society
concerned itself.1
The two taboos of totemism with which human morality has
its beginning, are not on a par psychologically. The ﬁrst of them,
the law protecting the totem animal, is founded wholly on emotional motives: the father had actually been eliminated, and in no
real sense could the deed be undone. But the second rule, the
prohibition of incest, has a powerful practical basis as well.
Sexual desires do not unite men but divide them. Though the
brothers had banded together in order to overcome their father,
they were all one another’s rivals in regard to the women. Each
of them would have wished, like his father, to have all the
women to himself. The new organization would have collapsed
in a struggle of all against all, for none of them was of such overmastering strength as to be able to take on his father’s part with
success. Thus the brothers had no alternative, if they were to live
together, but—not, perhaps, until they had passed through many
dangerous crises—to institute the law against incest, by which
they all alike renounced the women whom they desired and
who had been their chief motive for despatching their father. In
this way they rescued the organization which had made them
strong—and which may have been based on homosexual feelings and acts, originating perhaps during the period of their
expulsion from the horde. Here, too, may perhaps have been the
germ of the institution of matriarchy, described by Bachofen
[1861], which was in turn replaced by the patriarchal organization of the family.
On the other hand, the claim of totemism to be regarded as a
1

‘Murder and incest, or oﬀences of a like kind against the sacred laws of
blood, are in primitive society the only crimes of which the community as
such takes cognizance.’ (Smith, 1894, 419.)

167

168 totem and taboo
ﬁrst attempt at a religion is based on the ﬁrst of these two
taboos—that upon taking the life of the totem animal. The animal struck the sons as a natural and obvious substitute for their
father; but the treatment of it which they found imposed on
themselves expressed more than the need to exhibit their
remorse. They could attempt, in their relation to this surrogate
father, to allay their burning sense of guilt, to bring about a kind
of reconciliation with their father. The totemic system was, as it
were, a covenant with their father, in which he promised them
everything that a childish imagination may expect from a
father—protection, care and indulgence—while on their side
they undertook to respect his life, that is to say, not to repeat the
deed which had brought destruction on their real father. Totemism, moreover, contained an attempt at self-justiﬁcation: ‘If our
father had treated us in the way the totem does, we should never
have felt tempted to kill him.’ In this fashion totemism helped to
smooth things over and to make it possible to forget the event to
which it owed its origin.
Features were thus brought into existence which continued
thenceforward to have a determining inﬂuence on the nature of
religion. Totemic religion arose from the ﬁlial sense of guilt, in
an attempt to allay that feeling and to appease the father by
deferred obedience to him. All later religions are seen to be
attempts at solving the same problem. They vary according to
the stage of civilization at which they arise and according to the
methods which they adopt; but all have the same end in view
and are reactions to the same great event with which civilization
began and which, since it occurred, has not allowed mankind a
moment’s rest.
There is another feature which was already present in totemism and which has been preserved unaltered in religion. The
tension of ambivalence was evidently too great for any contrivance to be able to counteract it; or it is possible that psychological conditions in general are unfavourable to getting rid of

the return of totemism in childhood

these antithetical emotions. However that may be, we ﬁnd that
the ambivalence implicit in the father-complex persists in totemism and in religions generally. Totemic religion not only comprised expressions of remorse and attempts at atonement, it also
served as a remembrance of the triumph over the father. Satisfaction over that triumph led to the institution of the memorial
festival of the totem meal, in which the restrictions of deferred
obedience no longer held. Thus it became a duty to repeat the
crime of parricide again and again in the sacriﬁce of the totem
animal, whenever, as a result of the changing conditions of life,
the cherished fruit of the crime—appropriation of the paternal
attributes—threatened to disappear. We shall not be surprised to
ﬁnd that the element of ﬁlial rebelliousness also emerges, in the
1ater products of religion, often in the strangest disguises and
transformations.
Hitherto we have followed the developments of the aﬀectionate
current of feeling towards the father, transformed into remorse,
as we ﬁnd them in religion and in moral ordinances (which are
not sharply distinguished in totemism). But we must not overlook the fact that it was in the main with the impulses that led to
parricide that the victory lay. For a long time afterwards, the
social fraternal feelings, which were the basis of the whole transformation, continued to exercise a profound inﬂuence on the
development of society. They found expression in the sanctiﬁcation of the blood tie, in the emphasis upon the solidarity of all
life within the same clan. In thus guaranteeing one another’s
lives, the brothers were declaring that no one of them must be
treated by another as their father was treated by them all jointly.
They were precluding the possibility of a repetition of their
father’s fate. To the religiously based prohibition against killing
the totem was now added the socially based prohibition against
fratricide. It was not until long afterwards that the prohibition
ceased to be limited to members of the clan and assumed the
simple form: ‘Thou shalt do no murder.’ The patriarchal horde

169

170 totem and taboo
was replaced in the ﬁrst instance by the fraternal clan, whose
existence was assured by the blood tie. Society was now based on
complicity in the common crime; religion was based on the
sense of guilt and the remorse attaching to it; while morality was
based partly on the exigencies of this society and partly on the
penance demanded by the sense of guilt.
Thus psycho-analysis, in contradiction to the more recent
views of the totemic system but in agreement with the earlier
ones, requires us to assume that totemism and exogamy were
intimately connected and had a simultaneous origin.

(6)
A great number of powerful motives restrain me from any
attempt at picturing the further development of religions from
their origin in totemism to their condition to-day. I will only
follow two threads whose course I can trace with especial clarity
as they run through the pattern: the theme of the totemic
sacriﬁce and the relation of son to father.1
Robertson Smith has shown us that the ancient totem meal
recurs in the original form of sacriﬁce. The meaning of the act is
the same: sanctiﬁcation through participation in a common
meal. The sense of guilt, which can only be allayed by the solidarity of all the participants, also persists. What is new is the clan
deity, in whose supposed presence the sacriﬁce is performed,
who participates in the meal as though he were a clansman, and
with whom those who consume the meal become identiﬁed.
How does the god come to be in a situation to which he was
originally a stranger?
The answer might be that in the meantime the concept of God
1

Cf. the discussion by C. G. Jung (1912), which is governed by views diﬀering
in certain respects from mine.

the return of totemism in childhood

had emerged—from some unknown source—and had taken
control of the whole of religious life; and that, like everything
else that was to survive, the totem meal had been obliged to ﬁnd
a point of contact with the new system. The psycho-analysis of
individual human beings, however, teaches us with quite special
insistence that the god of each of them is formed in the likeness
of his father, that his personal relation to God depends on his
relation to his father in the ﬂesh and oscillates and changes along
with that relation, and that at bottom God is nothing other than
an exalted father. As in the case of totemism, psycho-analysis
recommends us to have faith in the believers who call God their
father, just as the totem was called the tribal ancestor. If psychoanalysis deserves any attention, then—without prejudice to any
other sources or meanings of the concept of God, upon which
psycho-analysis can throw no light—the paternal element in
that concept must be a most important one. But in that case the
father is represented twice over in the situation of primitive
sacriﬁce: once as God and once as the totemic animal victim.
And, even granting the restricted number of explanations open
to psycho-analysis, one must ask whether this is possible and
what sense it can have.
We know that there are a multiplicity of relations between the
god and the sacred animal (the totem or the sacriﬁcial victim).
(1) Each god usually has an animal (and quite often several
animals) sacred to him. (2) In the case of certain specially sacred
sacriﬁces—‘mystic’ sacriﬁces—the victim was precisely the
animal sacred to the god (Smith, 1894 [290]). (3) The god was
often worshipped in the shape of an animal (or, to look at it in
another way, animals were worshipped as gods) long after the
age of totemism. (4) In myths the god often transforms himself
into an animal, and frequently into the animal that is sacred to
him.
It therefore seems plausible to suppose that the god himself
was the totem animal, and that he developed out of it at a later

171

172 totem and taboo
stage of religious feeling. But we are relieved from the necessity
for further discussion by the consideration that the totem is
nothing other than a surrogate of the father. Thus, while the
totem may be the ﬁrst form of father-surrogate, the god will be a
later one, in which the father has regained his human shape. A
new creation such as this, derived from what constitutes the root
of every form of religion—a longing for the father—might
occur if in the process of time some fundamental change had
taken place in man’s relation to the father, and perhaps, too, in
his relation to animals.
Signs of the occurrence of changes of this kind may easily be
seen, even if we leave on one side the beginning of a mental
estrangement from animals and the disrupting of totemism
owing to domestication. (See above, p. 158 f.) There was one
factor in the state of aﬀairs produced by the elimination of the
father which was bound in the course of time to cause an enormous increase in the longing felt for him. Each single one of the
brothers who had banded together for the purpose of killing
their father was inspired by a wish to become like him and had
given expression to it by incorporating parts of their father’s
surrogate in the totem meal. But, in consequence of the pressure
exercised upon each participant by the fraternal clan as a whole,
that wish could not be fulﬁlled. For the future no one could or
might ever again attain the father’s supreme power, even though
that was what all of them had striven for. Thus after a long lapse
of time their bitterness against their father, which had driven
them to their deed, grew less, and their longing for him
increased; and it became possible for an ideal to emerge which
embodied the unlimited power of the primal father against
whom they had once fought as well as their readiness to submit
to him. As a result of decisive cultural changes, the original
democratic equality that had prevailed among all the individual
clansmen became untenable; and there developed at the same
time an inclination, based on veneration felt for particular

the return of totemism in childhood

human individuals, to revive the ancient paternal ideal by
creating gods. The notion of a man becoming a god or of a god
dying strikes us to-day as shockingly presumptuous; but even in
classical antiquity there was nothing revolting in it.1 The elevation of the father who had once been murdered into a god
from whom the clan claimed descent was a far more serious
attempt at atonement than had been the ancient covenant with
the totem.
I cannot suggest at what point in this process of development
a place is to be found for the great mother-goddesses, who may
perhaps in general have preceded the father-gods. It seems certain, however, that the change in attitude to the father was not
restricted to the sphere of religion but that it extended in a
consistent manner to that other side of human life which had
been aﬀected by the father’s removal—to social organization.
With the introduction of father-deities a fatherless society gradually changed into one organized on a patriarchal basis. The
family was a restoration of the former primal horde and it gave
back to fathers a large portion of their former rights. There were
once more fathers, but the social achievements of the fraternal
clan had not been abandoned; and the gulf between the new
fathers of a family and the unrestricted primal father of the
horde was wide enough to guarantee the continuance of the
religious craving, the persistence of an unappeased longing for
the father.
We see, then, that in the scene of sacriﬁce before the god of
the clan the father is in fact represented twice over—as the god
and as the totemic animal victim. But in our attempts at
1

‘To us moderns, for whom the breach which divides the human and the
divine has deepened into an impassable gulf; such mimicry may appear
impious, but it was otherwise with the ancients. To their thinking gods and
men were akin, for many families traced their descent from a divinity, and the
deiﬁcation of a man probably seemed as little extraordinary to them as the
canonization of a saint seems to a modern Catholic.’ (Frazer, 1911a, 2, 177 f.)

173

174 totem and taboo
understanding this situation we must beware of interpretations
which seek to translate it in a two-dimensional fashion as though
it were an allegory, and which in so doing forget its historical
stratiﬁcation. The two-fold presence of the father corresponds to
the two chronologically successive meanings of the scene. The
ambivalent attitude towards the father has found a plastic expression in it, and so, too, has the victory of the son’s aﬀectionate
emotions over his hostile ones. The scene of the father’s vanquishment, of his greatest defeat, has become the stuﬀ for the
representation of his supreme triumph. The importance which is
everywhere, without exception, ascribed to sacriﬁce lies in the
fact that it oﬀers satisfaction to the father for the outrage inﬂicted
on him in the same act in which that deed is commemorated.
As time went on, the animal lost its sacred character and the
sacriﬁce lost its connection with the totem feast; it became a
simple oﬀering to the deity, an act of renunciation in favour of
the god. God Himself had become so far exalted above mankind
that He could only be approached through an intermediary—
the priest. At the same time divine kings made their appearance
in the social structure and introduced the patriarchal system into
the state. It must be confessed that the revenge taken by the
deposed and restored father was a harsh one: the dominance of
authority was at its climax. The subjugated sons made use of the
new situation in order to unburden themselves still further of
their sense of guilt. They were no longer in any way responsible
for the sacriﬁce as it now was. It was God Himself who
demanded it and regulated it. This is the phase in which we ﬁnd
myths showing the god himself killing the animal which is
sacred to him and which is in fact himself. Here we have the
most extreme denial of the great crime which was the beginning
of society and of the sense of guilt. But there is a second meaning to this last picture of sacriﬁce which is unmistakable. It
expresses satisfaction at the earlier father-surrogate having been
abandoned in favour of the superior concept of God. At this

the return of totemism in childhood

point the psycho-analytic interpretation of the scene coincides
approximately with the allegorical, surface translation of it,
which represents the god as overcoming the animal side of his
own nature.1
Nevertheless it would be a mistake to suppose that the hostile
impulses inherent in the father-complex were completely
silenced during this period of revived paternal authority. On the
contrary, the ﬁrst phases of the dominance of the two new
father-surrogates—gods and kings—show the most energetic
signs of the ambivalence that remains a characteristic of religion.
In his great work, The Golden Bough, Frazer [1911a, 2, Chap.
XVIII] puts forward the view that the earliest kings of the Latin
tribes were foreigners who played the part of a god and were
solemnly executed at a particular festival. The annual sacriﬁce
(or, as a variant, self-sacriﬁce) of a god seems to have been an
essential element in the Semitic religions. The ceremonials of
human sacriﬁce, performed in the most diﬀerent parts of the
inhabited globe, leave very little doubt that the victims met their
end as representatives of the deity; and these sacriﬁcial rites can
be traced into late times, with an inanimate eﬃgy or puppet
taking the place of the living human being. The theanthropic
sacriﬁce of the god, into which it is unfortunately impossible for
me to enter here as fully as into animal sacriﬁce, throws a searching retrospective light upon the meaning of the older forms of
sacriﬁce. [Smith, 1894, 410 f.] It confesses, with a frankness that
1

It is generally agreed that when, in mythologies, one generation of gods is
overcome by another, what is denoted is the historical replacement of one
religious system by a new one, whether as a result of foreign conquest or
of psychological development. In the latter case myth approximates to what
Silberer [1909] has described as ‘functional phenomena’. [Cf. Freud, 1900,
English translation, 1932, 464 ﬀ.] The view maintained by Jung (1912) that the
god who kills the animal is a libidinal symbol implies a concept of libido other
than that which has hitherto been employed and seems to me questionable
from every point of view.

175

176 totem and taboo
could hardly be excelled, to the fact that the object of the act of
sacriﬁce has always been the same—namely what is now worshipped as God, that is to say, the father. The problem of the
relation between animal and human sacriﬁce thus admits of a
simple solution. The original animal sacriﬁce was already a substitute for a human sacriﬁce—for the ceremonial killing of the
father; so that, when the father-surrogate once more resumed its
human shape, the animal sacriﬁce too could be changed back
into a human sacriﬁce.
The memory of the ﬁrst great act of sacriﬁce thus proved
indestructible, in spite of every eﬀort to forget it; and at the very
point at which men sought to be at the farthest distance from the
motives that led to it, its undistorted reproduction emerged in
the form of the sacriﬁce of the god. I need not enlarge here upon
the developments of religious thought which, in the shape of
rationalizations, made this recurrence possible. Robertson Smith,
who had no thought of our derivation of sacriﬁce from the great
event in human prehistory, states that the ceremonies at the
festivals in which the ancient Semites celebrated the death of a
deity ‘were currently interpreted as the commemoration of a
mythical tragedy’ [Ibid., 413]. ‘The mourning’, he declares, ‘is
not a spontaneous expression of sympathy with the divine tragedy, but obligatory and enforced by fear of supernatural anger.
And a chief object of the mourners is to disclaim responsibility
for the god’s death—a point which has already come before us
in connection with theanthropic sacriﬁces, such as the “oxmurder at Athens”.’ (Ibid., 412.) It seems most probable that
these ‘current interpretations’ were correct and that the feelings
of the celebrants were fully explained by the underlying
situation.
Let us assume it to be a fact, then, that in the course of the later
development of religions the two driving factors, the son’s sense
of guilt and the son’s rebelliousness, never became extinct.
Whatever attempt was made at solving the religious problem,

the return of totemism in childhood

whatever kind of reconciliation was eﬀected between these two
opposing mental forces, sooner or later broke down, under the
combined inﬂuence, no doubt, of historical events, cultural
changes and internal psychical modiﬁcations.
The son’s eﬀorts to put himself in the place of the father-god
became ever more obvious. The introduction of agriculture
increased the son’s importance in the patriarchal family. He ventured upon new demonstrations of his incestuous libido, which
found symbolic satisfaction in his cultivation of Mother Earth.
Divine ﬁgures such as Attis, Adonis and Tammuz emerged,
spirits of vegetation and at the same time youthful divinities
enjoying the favours of mother goddesses and committing incest
with their mother in deﬁance of their father. But the sense of
guilt, which was not allayed by these creations, found expression
in myths which granted only short lives to these youthful
favourites of the mother-goddesses and decreed their punishment by emasculation or by the wrath of the father in the form
of an animal. Adonis was killed by a wild boar, the sacred animal
of Aphrodite; Attis, beloved of Cybele, perished by castration.1
The mourning for these gods and the rejoicings over their
1

Fear of castration plays an extremely large part, in the case of the youthful
neurotics whom we come across, as an interference in their relations with their
father. The illuminating instance reported by Ferenczi (1913a) has shown us
how a little boy took as his totem the beast that had snapped at his little penis.
[See page 151 f.] When our children come to hear of ritual circumcision, they
equate it with castration. The parallel in social psychology to this reaction by
children has not yet been worked out, so far as I am aware. In primæval times
and in primitive races, where circumcision is so frequent, it is performed at the
age of initiation into manhood and it is at that age that its signiﬁcance is to be
found; it was only as a secondary development that it was shifted back to the
early years of life. It is of very great interest to ﬁnd that among primitive
peoples circumcision is combined with cutting the hair and knocking out teeth
or is replaced by them, and that our children, who cannot possibly have any
knowledge of this, in fact treat these two operations, in the anxiety with which
they react to them, as equivalents of castration.

177

178 totem and taboo
resurrection passed over into the ritual of another son-deity who
was destined to lasting success.
When Christianity ﬁrst penetrated into the ancient world it
met with competition from the religion of Mithras and for a
time it was doubtful which of the two deities would gain the
victory. In spite of the halo of light surrounding his form, the
youthful Persian god remains obscure to us. We may perhaps
infer from the sculptures of Mithras slaying a bull that he represented a son who was alone in sacriﬁcing his father and thus
redeemed his brothers from their burden of complicity in the
deed. There was an alternative method of allaying their guilt and
this was ﬁrst adopted by Christ. He sacriﬁced his own life and so
redeemed the company of brothers from original sin.
The doctrine of original sin was of Orphic origin. It formed a
part of the mysteries, and spread from them to the schools of
philosophy of ancient Greece. (Reinach, 1905–12, 2, 75 ﬀ.)
Mankind, it was said, were descended from the Titans, who had
killed the young Dionysus-Zagreus and had torn him to pieces.
The burden of this crime weighed on them. A fragment of
Anaximander relates how the unity of the world was broken by
a primæval sin,1 and that whatever issued from it must bear
the punishment. The tumultuous mobbing, the killing and the
tearing in pieces by the Titans reminds us clearly enough of
the totemic sacriﬁce described by St. Nilus [Ibid., 2, 93]—as,
for the matter of that, do many other ancient myths, including,
for instance, that of the death of Orpheus himself. Nevertheless,
there is a disturbing diﬀerence in the fact of the murder having
been committed on a youthful god.
There can be no doubt that in the Christian myth the original
sin was one against God the Father. If, however, Christ redeemed
mankind from the burden of original sin by the sacriﬁce of his
own life, we are driven to conclude that the sin was a murder.
1

‘Une sorte de péché proethnique’ (Reinach, 1905–12, 2, 76).

the return of totemism in childhood

The law of talion, which is so deeply rooted in human feelings,
lays it down that a murder can only be expiated by the sacriﬁce
of another life: self-sacriﬁce points back to blood-guilt.1 And if
this sacriﬁce of a life brought about atonement with God the
Father, the crime to be expiated can only have been the murder
of the father.
In the Christian doctrine, therefore, men were acknowledging
in the most undisguised manner the guilty primæval deed, since
they found the fullest atonement for it in the sacriﬁce of this one
son. Atonement with the father was all the more complete since
the sacriﬁce was accompanied by a total renunciation of the
women on whose account the rebellion against the father was
started. But at that point the inexorable psychological law of
ambivalence stepped in. The very deed in which the son oﬀered
the greatest possible atonement to the father brought him at the
same time to the attainment of his wishes against the father. He
himself became God, beside, or, more correctly, in place of, the
father. A son-religion displaced the father-religion. As a sign of
this substitution the ancient totem meal was revived in the form
of communion, in which the company of brothers consumed
the ﬂesh and blood of the son—no longer the father—obtained
sanctity thereby and identiﬁed themselves with him. Thus we
can trace through the ages the identity of the totem meal with
animal sacriﬁce, with theanthropic human sacriﬁce and with the
Christian Eucharist, and we can recognize in all these rituals the
eﬀect of the crime by which men were so deeply weighed down
but of which they must none the less feel so proud. The Christian communion, however, is essentially a fresh elimination
of the father, a repetition of the guilty deed. We can see the
full justice of Frazer’s pronouncement that ‘the Christian

We ﬁnd that impulses to suicide in a neurotic turn out regularly to be selfpunishments for wishes for someone else’s death.
1

179

180 totem and taboo
communion has absorbed within itself a sacrament which is
doubtless far older than Christianity’.1

(7)
An event such as the elimination of the primal father by the
company of his sons must inevitably have left ineradicable traces
in the history of humanity; and the less it itself was recollected,
the more numerous must have been the substitutes to which it
gave rise.2 I shall resist the temptation of pointing out these
traces in mythology, where they are not hard to ﬁnd, and shall
turn in another direction and take up a suggestion made by
Salomon Reinach in a most instructive essay on the death of
Orpheus.3
In the history of Greek art we come upon a situation which
shows striking resemblances to the scene of the totem meal as
identiﬁed by Robertson Smith, and not less profound diﬀerences
from it. I have in mind the situation of the most ancient Greek
tragedy. A company of individuals, named and dressed alike,
surrounded a single ﬁgure, all hanging upon his words and
deeds: they were the Chorus and the impersonator of the Hero.
He was originally the only actor. Later, a second and third actor
were added, to play as counterpart to the Hero and as characters
1

Frazer (1912, 2, 51). No one familiar with the literature of the subject will
imagine that the derivation of Christian communion from the totem meal is an
idea originating from the author of the present essay.
2
In Ariel’s words from The Tempest:
‘Full fathom ﬁve thy father lies;
Of his bones are coral made;
Those are pearls that were his eyes:
Nothing of him that doth fade,
But doth suﬀer a sea-change
Into something rich and strange.’
3
‘La mort d’Orphée’, contained in the volume which I have so often quoted
(1905–12, 2, 100 ﬀ.).

the return of totemism in childhood

split oﬀ from him; but the character of the Hero himself and his
relation to the Chorus remained unaltered. The Hero of tragedy
must suﬀer; to this day that remains the essence of a tragedy. He
had to bear the burden of what was known as ‘tragic guilt’; the
basis of that guilt is not always easy to ﬁnd, for in the light of our
everyday life it is often no guilt at all. As a rule it lay in rebellion
against some divine or human authority; and the Chorus
accompanied the Hero with feelings of sympathy, sought to
hold him back, to warn him and to sober him, and mourned
over him when he had met with what was felt as the merited
punishment for his rash undertaking.
But why had the Hero of tragedy to suﬀer? and what was the
meaning of his ‘tragic guilt’? I will cut the discussion short and
give a quick reply. He had to suﬀer because he was the primal
father, the Hero of the great primæval tragedy which was being
re-enacted with a tendentious twist; and the tragic guilt was the
guilt which he had to take on himself in order to relieve the
Chorus from theirs. The scene upon the stage was derived from
the historical scene through a process of systematic distortion—
one might even say, as the product of a reﬁned hypocrisy. In the
remote reality it had actually been the members of the Chorus
who caused the Hero’s suﬀering; now, however, they exhausted
themselves with sympathy and regret and it was the Hero himself who was responsible for his own suﬀerings. The crime
which was thrown on to his shoulders, presumptuousness and
rebelliousness against a great authority, was precisely the crime
for which the members of the Chorus, the company of
brothers, were responsible. Thus the tragic Hero became,
though it might be against his will, the redeemer of the
Chorus.
In Greek tragedy the special subject-matter of the performance was the suﬀerings of the divine goat, Dionysus, and the
lamentation of the goats who were his followers and who
identiﬁed themselves with him. That being so, it is easy to

181

182 totem and taboo
understand how drama, which had become extinct, was kindled
into fresh life in the Middle Ages around the Passion of Christ.
At the conclusion, then, of this exceedingly condensed inquiry, I
should like to insist that its outcome shows that the beginnings
of religion, morals, society and art converge in the Œdipus complex. This is in complete agreement with the psycho-analytic
ﬁnding that the same complex constitutes the nucleus of all
neuroses, so far as our present knowledge goes. It seems to me a
most surprising discovery that the problems of social psychology, too, should prove soluble on the basis of one single concrete point—man’s relation to his father. It is even possible that
yet another psychological problem belongs in this same connection. I have often had occasion to point out that emotional
ambivalence in the proper sense of the term—that is, the simultaneous existence of love and hate towards the same object—lies
at the root of many important cultural institutions. We know
nothing of the origin of this ambivalence. One possible assumption is that it is a fundamental phenomenon of our emotional
life. But it seems to me quite worth considering another possibility, namely that originally it formed no part of our emotional life
but was acquired by the human race in connection with their
father-complex,1 precisely where the psycho-analytic examination of modern individuals still ﬁnds it revealed at its strongest.2
1

Or, more correctly, their parental complex.
Since I am used to being misunderstood, I think it worth while to insist
explicitly that the derivations which I have proposed in these pages do not in
the least overlook the complexity of the phenomena under review. All that they
claim is to have added a new factor to the sources, known or still unknown, of
religion, morality and society—a factor based on a consideration of the implications of psycho-analysis. I must leave to others the task of synthesizing the
explanation into a unity. It does, however, follow from the nature of the new
contribution that it could not play any other than a central part in such a
synthesis, even though powerful emotional resistances might have to be overcome before its great importance was recognized.
2

the return of totemism in childhood

Before I bring my remarks to a close, however, I must ﬁnd
room to point out that, though my arguments have led to a high
degree of convergence upon a single comprehensive nexus of
ideas, this fact cannot blind us to the uncertainties of my premises or the diﬃculties involved in my conclusions. I will only
mention two of the latter which may have forced themselves on
the notice of a number of my readers.
No one can have failed to observe, in the ﬁrst place, that I have
taken as the basis of my whole position the existence of a collective mind, in which mental processes occur just as they do in the
mind of an individual. In particular, I have supposed that the
sense of guilt for an action has persisted for many thousands of
years and has remained operative in generations which can have
had no knowledge of that action. I have supposed that an emotional process, such as might have developed in generations of
sons who were ill-treated by their father, has extended to new
generations which were exempt from such treatment for the
very reason that their father had been eliminated. It must be
admitted that these are grave diﬃculties; and any explanation
that could avoid presumptions of such a kind would seem to be
preferable.
Further reﬂection, however, will show that I am not alone in
the responsibility for this bold procedure. Without the assumption of a collective mind, which makes it possible to neglect the
interruptions of mental acts caused by the extinction of the individual, social psychology in general cannot exist. Unless psychical processes were continued from one generation to another, if
each generation were obliged to acquire its attitude to life anew,
there would be no progress in this ﬁeld and next to no development. This gives rise to two further questions: how much can we
attribute to psychical continuity in the sequence of generations?
and what are the ways and means employed by one generation
in order to hand on its mental states to the next one? I shall not
pretend that these problems are suﬃciently explained or that

183

184 totem and taboo
direct communication and tradition—which are the ﬁrst things
that occur to one—are enough to account for the process. Social
psychology shows very little interest, on the whole, in the manner in which the required continuity in the mental life of successive generations is established. A part of the problem seems to be
met by the inheritance of psychical dispositions which, however,
need to be given some sort of impetus in the life of the individual before they can be roused into actual operation. This may
be the meaning of the poet’s words:
‘Was du ererbt von deinen Vätern hast,
Erwirb es, um es zu besitzen.’1
The problem would seem even more diﬃcult if we had to
admit that mental impulses could be so completely suppressed
as to leave no trace whatever behind them. But that is not the
case. Even the most ruthless suppression must leave room for
distorted surrogate impulses and for reactions resulting from
them. If so, however, we may safely assume that no generation is
able to conceal any of its more important mental processes from
its successor. For psycho-analysis has shown us that everyone
possesses in his unconscious mental activity an apparatus which
enables him to interpret other people’s reactions, that is, to undo
the distortions which other people have imposed on the expression of their feelings. An unconscious understanding such as this
of all the customs, ceremonies and dogmas left behind by the
original relation to the father may have made it possible for later
generations to take over their heritage of emotion.
Another diﬃculty might actually be brought forward from
psycho-analytic quarters. The earliest moral precepts and restrictions in primitive society have been explained by us as reactions
1

[Goethe, Faust, Part I: ‘What thou hast inherited from thy fathers, acquire it to
make it thine.’]

the return of totemism in childhood

to a deed which gave those who performed it the concept of
‘crime’. They felt remorse for the deed and decided that it
should never be repeated and that its performance should bring
no advantage. This creative sense of guilt still persists among us.
We ﬁnd it operating in an asocial manner in neurotics, and
producing new moral precepts and persistent restrictions, as an
atonement for crimes that have been committed and as a precaution against the committing of new ones.1 If, however, we
inquire among these neurotics to discover what were the deeds
which provoked these reactions, we shall be disappointed. We
ﬁnd no deeds, but only impulses and emotions, set upon evil
ends but held back from their achievement. What lie behind the
sense of guilt of neurotics are always psychical realities and never
factual ones. What characterizes neurotics is the fact that they
prefer psychical to factual reality and react just as seriously to
thoughts as normal persons do to realities.
May not the same have been true of primitive men? We are
justiﬁed in believing that, as one of the phenomena of their
narcissistic organization, they overvalued their psychical acts to
an extraordinary degree.2 Accordingly the mere hostile impulse
against the father, the mere existence of a wishful phantasy of
killing and devouring him, would have been enough to produce
the moral reaction that created totemism and taboo. In this way
we should avoid the necessity for deriving the origin of our
cultural legacy, of which we justly feel so proud, from a hideous
crime, revolting to all our feelings. No damage would thus be
done to the causal chain stretching from the beginning to the
present day, for psychical reality would be strong enough to bear
the weight of these consequences. To this it may be objected that
an alteration in the form of society from a patriarchal horde to
a fraternal clan did actually take place. This is a powerful
1
2

Cf. the essay on taboo, the second in this volume [p. 78 ﬀ.].
Cf. the third essay in this volume [p. 99].

185

186 totem and taboo
argument, but not a conclusive one. The alteration might have
been eﬀected in a less violent fashion and none the less have
been capable of determining the appearance of the moral reaction. So long as the pressure exercised by the primal father could
be felt, the hostile feelings towards him were justiﬁed, and
remorse on their account would have to await a later day. And if
it is further argued that everything derived from the ambivalent
relation to the father—taboo and the sacriﬁcial ordinance—is
characterized by the deepest seriousness and the most complete
reality, this further objection carries just as little weight. For the
ceremonials and inhibitions of obsessional neurotics show these
same characteristics and are nevertheless derived only from
psychical reality—from intentions and not from their execution.
We must avoid transplanting a contempt for what is merely
thought or wished from our commonplace world, with its
wealth of material values, into the world of primitive men and
neurotics, of which the wealth lies only within themselves.
Here we are faced by a decision which is indeed no easy one.
First, however, it must be confessed that the distinction, which
may seem fundamental to other people, does not in our judgment aﬀect the heart of the matter. If wishes and impulses have
the full value of facts for primitive men, it is our business to give
their attitude our understanding attention instead of correcting
it in accordance with our own standards. Let us, then, examine
more closely the case of neurosis—comparison with which led
us into our present uncertainty. It is not accurate to say that
obsessional neurotics, weighed down under the burden of an
excessive morality, are defending themselves only against
psychical reality and are punishing themselves for impulses which
were merely felt. Historical reality has a share in the matter as well.
In their childhood they had these evil impulses pure and simple,
and turned them into acts so far as the impotence of childhood
allowed. Each of these excessively virtuous individuals passed
through an evil period in his infancy—a phase of perversion

the return of totemism in childhood

which was the forerunner and precondition of the later period
of excessive morality. The analogy between primitive men and
neurotics will therefore be far more fully established if we suppose that in the former instance, too, psychical reality—as to the
form taken by which we are in no doubt—coincided at the
beginning with factual reality: that primitive men actually did
what all the evidence shows that they intended to do.
Nor must we let ourselves be inﬂuenced too far in our judgment of primitive men by the analogy of neurotics. There are
distinctions, too, which must be borne in mind. It is no doubt
true that the sharp contrast that we make between thinking and
doing is absent in both of them. But neurotics are above all
inhibited in their actions: with them the thought is a complete
substitute for the deed. Primitive men, on the other hand, are
uninhibited: thought passes directly into action. With them it is
rather the deed that is a substitute for the thought. And that is
why, without laying claim to any ﬁnality of judgment, I think
that in the case before us it may safely be assumed that ‘in the
beginning was the Deed’.1

1

[‘Im Anfang war die Tat’ (Goethe, Faust, Part I).]

187

L IST OF W ORKS REFERRED TO IN THE T EXT

[Titles of books and periodicals are in italics; titles of papers are in inverted
commas. Abbreviations are in accordance with the World List of Scientiﬁc
Periodicals (Oxford, 1934). Numerals in thick type refer to volumes; ordinary numerals refer to pages. ‘Trans.’ before an entry indicates that any
reference in the text is not to the original but to an English translation. G.S.
= Freud, Gesammelte Schriften (12 vols.), Vienna, 1924–34. G.W. = Freud,
Gesammelte Werke (18 vols.), London, 1940–. C.P. = Freud, Collected Papers
(5 vols.), London, 1924–50.]
Abraham, K. (1912). ‘Über die determinierende Kraft des Namens’, Int. Z.
Psychoanal., 2, 133.
Abraham, K. (1914). ‘Über Einschränkungen und Umwandlungen der
Schaulust bei den Psychoneurotikern’, Jb. Psychoanal., 6, 25.
(Trans.: ‘Restrictions and Transformations of Scopophilia in PsychoNeurotics’, Selected Papers, 1927, 169.)
Abraham, K. (1927). Selected Papers, London.
Atkinson, J. J. (1903). Primal Law, London. (Included in Lang, A., Social
Origins.)
Avebury, Lord. See Lubbock, J.
Bachofen, J. J. (1861). Das Mutterrecht, Stuttgart.
Bastian, A. (1874–5). Die deutsche Expedition an der Loango-Küste (2 vols.),
Jena.

bibliography
Batchelor, J. (1901). The Ainu and their Folk-Lore, London.
Blumentritt, F. (1891). ‘Über die Eingeborenen der Insel Palawan’, Globus,
59, 181.
Boas, F. (1888). ‘The Central Eskimo’, Sixth Ann. Rep. Bur. Amer. Ethn., 399.
Boas, F. (1890). ‘Second General Report on the Indians of British Columbia’, Report of Sixtieth Meeting of the British Association, 562.
Brown, W. (1845). New Zealand and its Aborigines, London.
Cameron, A. L. P. (1885). ‘Notes on some Tribes of New South Wales’,
J. anthrop. Inst., 14, 344.
Codrington, R. H. (1891). The Melanesians, Oxford.
Crawley, E. (1902). The Mystic Rose, London.
Darwin C. (1871). The Descent of Man (2 vols.), London. (1875). The
Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication (2 vols.), 2nd
ed., London.
Dobrizhoffer, M. (1784). Historia de Abiponibus (3 vols.), Vienna.
Dorsey, J. O. (1884). ‘An Account of the War Customs of the Osages’,
Amer. Nat., 18, 113.
Durkheim, E. (1898). ‘La prohibition de l’inceste et ses origines’, Année
sociolog., 1, I.
Durkheim, E. (1902). ‘Sur le totémisme’, Année sociolog., 5, 82.
Durkheim, E. (1905). ‘Sur l’organisation matrimoniale des sociétés australiennes’, Annee sociolog., 8, 118.
Durkheim, E. (1912). Les formes élémentaires de la vie religieuse: Le système
totémique en Australie, Paris.
Eder, M. D. (1913). ‘Augenträume’, Int. Z. Psychoanal. 1, 157.
Ellis, Havelock (1914). Sexual Selection in Man (Studies in the Psychology of
Sex, IV), Philadelphia.
Ellis, W. (1832–6). Polynesian Researches, 2nd ed. (4 vols.), London.
Encyclopaedia Britannica (1910–11). Eleventh Edition, Cambridge.
Ferenczi, S. (1913a). ‘Ein kleiner Hahnemann’, Int. Z. Psychoanal., 1, 240.
(Trans.: ‘A Little Chanticleer’, Contributions to Psycho-Analysis, 1916,
240.)
Ferenczi, S. (1913b). ‘Zur Augensymbolik’, Int. Z. Psychoanal., 1, 161.
(Trans.: ‘On Eye Symbolism’, Contributions to Psycho-Analysis, 1916,
270.)
Ferenczi, S. (1916). Contributions to Psycho-Analysis, Boston. [Later titlepage: Sex in Psycho-Analysis.]
Fison, L. (1885). ‘The Nanga’, J. anthrop. Inst., 14, 14.
Fison, L., and Howitt, A. W. (1880). Kamilaroi and Kurnai, Melbourne.
Fraser, J. (1892). The Aborigines of New South Wales, Sydney.

189

190 totem and taboo
Fraser, J. G. (1910). Totemism and Exogamy (4 vols.), London.
Fraser, J. G. (1911a). The Magic Art (2 vols.) (The Golden Bough, 3rd ed., Part
I), London.
Fraser, J. G. (1911b). Taboo and the Perils of the Soul (The Golden Bough, 3rd
ed., Part II), London.
Fraser, J. G. (1912). Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild (2 vols.) (The Golden
Bough, 3rd ed., Part V), London.
Fraser, J. G. (1914). Adonis, Attis, Osiris, 3rd ed. (2 vols.) (The Golden Bough,
3rd ed., Part IV), London.
Freud, S. (1900). Die Traumdeutung, Vienna. (G.S., 2–3; G.W., 2–3.) (Trans.:
The Interpretation of Dreams, revised ed., London, 1932.)
Freud, S. (1905a). Drei Abhandlungen zur Sexualtheorie, Vienna. (G.S., 5, I;
G. W., 5, 29)
(Trans.: Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality, London, 1949.)
Freud, S. (1905b). Der Witz und seine Beziehung zum Unbewussten,
Vienna. (G.S., 9; G.W., 6.)
(Trans.: Wit and its Relation to the Unconscious, London, 1922.)
Freud, S. (1909a). ‘Analyse der Phobie eines fünfjährigen Knaben’, G.S., 8,
127; G.W., 7, 243.
(Trans.: ‘Analysis of a Phobia in a Five-Year-Old Boy’, C.P., 3, 149.)
Freud, S. (1909b). ‘Bemerkungen über einen Fall von Zwangsneurose’,
G.S., 8, 267; G.W., 7, 381.
(Trans.: ‘Notes upon a Case of Obsessional Neurosis’, C.P., 3, 293.)
Freud, S. (1910). ‘ “Über den Gegensinn der Urworte” ’, G.S., 10, 221; G.W.,
8, 214.
(Trans.: ‘ “The Antithetical Sense of Primal Words” ’, C.P., 4, 184.)
Freud, S. (1911a). ‘Formulierungen über die zwei Principien des
psychischen Geschehens’, G.S., 5, 409; G.W., 8, 214.
(Trans.: ‘Formulations regarding the Two Principles in Mental
Functioning’, C.P., 4, 13.)
Freud, S. (1911b). ‘Psychoanalytische Bemerkungen über einen autobiographisch beschriebenen Fall von Paranoia’, G.S., 8, 353; G.W., 8,
240.
(Trans.: ‘Psycho-Analytic Notes upon an Autobiographical Account
of a Case of Paranoia’, C.P., 3, 387.)
Freud, S. (1912). ‘Einige Bemerkungen über den Begriff des Unbewussten
in der Psychoanalyse’, G.S., 5, 433; G.W., 8, 430.
(Trans.: ‘A Note on the Unconscious in Psycho-Analysis’, C.P., 4, 22.)
Freud, S. (1919). ‘Das Unheimliche’, G.S., 10, 369; G.W., 12, 236.
(Trans.: ‘The Uncanny’, C.P., 4, 368.)

bibliography
Freud, S. (1933). Neue Folge der Vorlesungen zur Einführung in die Psychoanalyse, Vienna. (G.S., 12, 149; G.W., 15, I.)
(Trans.: New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis, London, 1933.)
Goldenweiser, A. (1910). ‘Totemism, an Analytical Study’, J. Am. Folk-Lore,
23, 179.
Gramberg, J. S. G. (1872). ‘Eene maand in de binnenlanden van Timor’,
Verh. batavia. Genoot., 36, 161.
Guis, Le Père J. (1902). ‘Les Canaques’, Missions Catholiques, 34, 208.
Haddon, A. C. (1902). ‘Presidential Address to the Anthropological Section’, Report of Seventy-Second Meeting of the British Association, 738.
Haeberlin, P. (1912). ‘Sexualgespenster’, Sexualprobleme, February.
Howitt, A. W. (1904). The Native Tribes of South-East Australia, London.
Hubert, H., and Mauss, M. (1899). ‘Essai sur la nature et la fonction du
sacriﬁce’, Année sociolog., 2, 29.
Hubert, H. (1904). ‘Esquisse d’une théorie générale de la magie’, Année
sociolog., 7, I.
Jevons, F. B. (1902). An Introduction to the History of Religion, 2nd ed.,
London. (1st ed., 1896.)
Joustra, M. (1902). ‘Het leven, de zeden en gewoonten der Bataks’, Meded.
ned. Zend., 46, 385.
Jung, C. G. (1912). ‘Wandlungen und Symbole der Libido’, Jb. psychoanal.
psychopath. Forsch., 3, 120 and 4, 162.
(Trans.: Psychology of the Unconscious, London, 1919.)
Jung, C. G. (1913). ‘Versuch einer Darstellung der psychoanalytischen
Theorie’, Jb. psychoanal. psychopath. Forsch., 5, 307.
(Trans.: The Theory of Psycho-Analysis, New York, 1915.)
Junod, H. A. (1898). Les Ba-Ronga, Neuchâtel.
Kaempfer, E. (1727). The History of Japan (2 vols.), London.
Keane, A. H. (1899). Man, Past and Present, Cambridge.
Kleinpaul, R. (1898). Die Lebendigen und die Toten in Volksglauben, Religion
und Sage, Leipzig.
Labbé, P. (1903). Un bagne russe, l’île de Sakhaline, Paris.
Lambert, Le Père (1900). Mœurs et superstitions des Néo-Calédoniens,
Nouméa.
Lang, A. (1903). Social Origins, London. (Includes Atkinson, J. J., Primal
Law.)
Lang, A. (1905). The Secret of the Totem, London.
Lang, A. (1910–11). ‘Totemism’, Encyclopaedia Britannica, 11th ed., 27, 79.
Lang, A. (1911). ‘Lord Avebury on Marriage, Totemism, and Religion’, FolkLore, 22, 402.

191

192 totem and taboo
Leslie, D. (1875). Among the Zulus and Amatongas, 2nd ed., Edinburgh.
Low, H. (1848). Sarawak, London.
Lozano, P. (1733). Descripcion . . . del Gran Chaco, Cordova.
Lubbock, J. (1870). The Origin of Civilisatión, London.
McLennan, J. F. (1865). Primitive Marriage, Edinburgh. (Reprinted in same
author’s Studies in Ancient History, London, 1876.)
McLennan, J. F. (1869–70). ‘The Worship of Animals and Plants’, Fortnightly Rev., N.S. 6, 407 and 562; N.S. 7, 194. (Reprinted in same
author’s Studies in Ancient History; Second Series, London, 1896.)
Maori, A Pakeha [pseud. for Maning, F. E.] (1884). Old New Zealand, new
ed., London.
Marett, R. R. (1900). ‘Pre-Animistic Religion’. Folk-Lore, 11, 162.
Marillier, L. (1898). ‘La place du totémisme dans l’évolution religieuse’,
Rev. Hist. Relig., 37, 204.
Mariner, W. (1818). An Account of the Natives of the Tonga Islands, 2nd ed.
(2 vols.), London. (1st ed., 1817.)
Max-Müller, F. (1897). Contributions to the Science of Mythology (2 vols.),
London.
Morgan, L. H. (1877). Ancient Society, London.
Müller, S. (1857). Reizen en Onderzoekingen in den Indischen Archipel,
Amsterdam.
Parkinson, R. (1907). Dreissig Jahre in der Südsee, Stuttgart.
Paulitschke, P. (1893–6). Ethnographie Nordost-Afrikas (2 vols.), Berlin.
Peckel, P. G. (1908). ‘Die Verwandtschaftsnamen des mittleren Neumecklenburg’, Anthropos, 3, 456.
Pickler, J., and Somló, F. (1900). Der Ursprung des Totemismus, Berlin.
Rank, O. (1907). Der Künstler, Vienna.
Rank, O. (1912). Das Inzestmotiv in Dichtung und Sage, Vienna.
Rank, O. (1913). ‘Eine noch nicht beschriebene Form des ÖdipusTraumes’, Int. Z. Psychoanal., 1, 151.
Reinach, S. (1905–12). Cultes, mythes et religions (4 vols.), Paris.
Reitler, R. (1913). ‘Zur Augensymbolik’, Int. Z. Psychoanal., 1, 159.
Ribbe, C. (1903). Zwei Jahre unter den Kannibalen der Salomo-Inseln,
Dresden.
Rivers, W. H. R. (1909). ‘Totemism in Polynesia and Melanesia’, J. R.
anthrop. inst., 39, 156.
Roth, H. Ling (1896). The Natives of Sarawak and British North Borneo
(2 vols.), London.
Schreber, D. P. (1903). Denkwürdigkeiten eines Nervenkranken, Leipzig.
Silberer, H. (1909). ‘Bericht über eine Methode, gewisse symbolische

bibliography
Halluzinations-Erscheinungen hervorzurufen und zu beobachten’,
Jb. psychoanal. psychopath. Forsch., 1, 513.
Smith, W. Robertson (1894). Lectures on the Religion of the Semites, new
[2nd] ed., London. (1st ed., 1889.)
Spencer, B., and Gillen, F. J. (1899). The Native Tribes of Central Australia,
London.
Spencer, H. (1870). ‘The Origin of Animal Worship’, Fortnightly Rev., N.S. 7,
535.
Spencer, H. (1893). The Principles of Sociology, 3rd ed., Vol. I, London.
Stekel, W. (1911). ‘Die Verpﬂichtung des Namens’, Z. Psychother. med.
Psychol., 3.
Storfer, A. J. (1911). Zur Sonderstellung des Vatermordes, Vienna.
Taylor, R. (1870). Te Ika a Maui, 2nd ed., London. (1st ed., 1855.)
Teit, J. A. (1900). The Thompson Indians of British Columbia (Jesup North
Paciﬁc Expedition, Vol. I), New York.
Thomas, N. W. (1910–11a). ‘Magic’, Encyclopaedia Britannica, 11th ed., 17,
304.
Thomas, N. W. (1910–11b). ‘Taboo’, Encyclopaedia Britannica, 11th ed., 26,
337.
Tylor, E. B. (1889). ‘A Method of Investigating the Development of Institutions’, J. anthrop. Inst., 18, 245.
Tylor, E. B. (1891). Primitive Culture, 3rd ed. (2 vols.), London. (1st ed.,
1871.)
Westermarck, E. (1901). The History of Human Marriage, 3rd ed., London.
(1st ed., 1891.)
Westermarck, E. (1906–8). The Origin and Development of the Moral Ideas
(2 vols.), London.
Wilken, G. A. (1884). ‘Het animisme bij de volken van den Indischen
Archipel’, Ind. Gids, 6 (Part I), 925.
Wulff, M. [Woolf, M.] (1912). ‘Beiträge zur infantilen Sexualität’, Zbl.
Psychoanal., 2, 6.
Wundt, W. (1906). Mythus und Religion, Teil II (Völkerpsychologie, Band II),
Leipzig.
Wundt, W. (1912). Elemente der Völkerpsychologie, Leipzig.
(Trans.: Elements of Folk Psychology, New York and London, 1916.)
Zweifel, J., and Moustier, M. (1880). Voyage aux sources du Niger,
Marseilles.

193

I NDEX

Abasia 60
Abel, K. 78
Abipone 65
Abraham, K. 66, 148
Adelaide Bay 64
Adonis 177
aﬀection, excessive in neurotics 57
agoraphobia 113
Agutaino 62
Aino 63, 92, 161
Akamba 13, 63
Allen, Grant 68
ambivalence: origin of 182; towards
an object 34–5; towards the dead
71–4; towards the mother-in-law
16
amnesia 35
Anaximander 178
ancestors, veneration of 76
animal phobias in children
148–52
animalism 88

animals, relation of children to
147–50
animatism 88, 107
animism 76, 87–90; and totemism
138
Apache 47
Apepi 92
Aphrodite 177
appeasement 42–8
Arpád, little 152–3
Arunta 133–5, 154
Atkinson, J.J. 146, 165
atonement for violation of taboo 24,
40
Attis 177
Australian aboriginees 1–5
auto-erotism 103
Avebury, Lord, see Lubbock, J.
avoidances 12–20; and incest 19
Aztec 161
Bachofen, J. J. 167

196 index
Bacon, Francis 96
Banks’ Island 14, 137
Barongo 13
Basoga 15
Bastian, A. 53, 55
Batchelor, J. 94
Batta 13
Bedouin 156, 161
Bini 162
Bleuler, E. 35
Blumentritt, F. 62
Boas, F. 62, 68, 138
Book of Rights in Ireland 54
Borneo 43, 63
British Columbia 62
British East Africa 13
British New Guinea 63
Brown, W. 51
Cambodia 54
Cameron, A. L. P. 6
cannibalism 95
Cape Padron 53
castration, fear of 151, 177
catechism, totemic 118–19
categorical imperative x, 26
Catholic Church and incest 10
Celebes 43
ceremonial prohibitions 32
Cervantes 59
children’s play and primitive
imitative representation 98
Choctaw 44, 47
chorus in Greek tragedy 180–7
Christ 178, 182
Christianity 177–9
Churinga, amulets 133
circumcision 177
classiﬁcatory system of relationships
7–20
Codrington, R. H. 12, 14, 96
collective mind 182–7

communion, Christian 179–81
conception theory of the Arunta
133–5, 136–7
conscience 79, 80, 81
co-operative magic 134, 136
court ceremonial 50
Crawley, E. 15, 17
Cybele 177
Dacota 44
Darwin, C. 145, 146, 147, 164, 165
dead: the contact with unclean
60–1; fear of 67–9; name taboo
64–8; transformed into demons
68–74
death: and belief in souls and demons
102; from eating a taboo anima
25; wishes 73, 81, 82, 84, 101
Delagoa Bay 13
délire du toucher 31
demons, fear of 67, 69, 70, 72, 76
Dieri 8
Dionysus 178, 181
Dobrizhoﬀer, M. 65
Dorsey, J. O. 45
dreams, interpretation of 112–15;
secondary revision 76, 111
dualism of body and soul 109
Durkheim, E. 131, 135, 140, 144,
146
Dyak 44, 46, 94
Eastern Bantu 15
Eder, M. D. 151
Ellis, Havelock 142
Ellis, W. 61
Encounter Bay 64
Encyclopaedia Britannica 22, 90
Eskimo, Central 68
exogamy: and totemism 5,
122–4, 139–46, 170; deﬁnition
of 5

index
father: killing of 164–9; longing for
172
father-complex 59, 60, 164, 166,
169
feasts 156, 163
Ferenczi, S. 150, 151, 152, 177
fertility magic 92
Fiji 12
Fison, L. 8, 13, 15, 19, 129
Flamen Dialis 53
Flaminica 54
Fraser, J. 68
fraternal clans 169, 172, 173
Frazer, J. G. passim; on Christian
communion 181; on exogamy 4,
5, 139, 143; on gods and men
173; on incest 5, 143; on kingship
59, 64; on magic 94, 97; on taboo
42, 48, 55; on totemism 4, 120,
122, 124–8, 134–8
Galla 43
Garcilasso de la Vega 128
Gazelle Peninsula 12
ghosts, fear of 45, 48, 66–9, 76
Gillen, F. J. 8, 132, 135, 136
Gilyak 94
gods: and sacred animals 171–5;
concepts of 174; creation of 173;
father-surrogates 171, 175
Goldenweiser, A. 127
gorilla 146
Gramburg, J. S. G. 44
Greek tragedy 180–7
group marriage 8
Guaycuru 64
guilt, sense of 79–86, 101–4,
166–9, 174, 178, 183–4
Guis, Le Père J. 63
Haddon, A. G. 131, 133
Haeberlin, P. 76

Hamlet 98
hangman 48
Hans, little 150, 151, 153
Hawaii 61
hero, in Greek tragedy 180–1
Hill-Tout, C. 138
Hobley, C. W. 14
horde, primal 146, 164–6, 173
horror of incest: among savages 7,
11; origin of 142–4
hostility to the dead, unconscious
70–2, 74, 77
Howitt, A. W. 141
Hubert, H. 91, 163
Hume 89
identiﬁcation of parents with their
children 18
inbreeding 143–4
Inca 128
incest: and totem-kinship 6–7;
importance of in neurosis 19;
punishment of 4–6; theme in
poetry 20; see horror of incest
incestuous nature of early love
objects 20, 144
infantilism, neurotic 20
inhibition, developmental 20
Intichiuma ceremony 132–4, 162
Ireland, kings of 54
Japan 52, 53, 55, 63, 92
Java 94
Jevons, F. B. 68, 160
Joustra, M. 13
Jung, C. G. ix, 170, 175
Junod, H. A. 13
Kaempfer, E. 53
Kant x
Keane, A. H. 128
King Kukulu 53

197

198 index
kings, divine 174; see rulers
king’s evil 49
kinship 156–62
Kleinpaul, R. 68, 69
Labbé, P. 95
Lambert, Le Père 12
Lang, A. 4, 11, 88, 127, 128, 129,
130, 131, 135, 137, 140, 146
Leper’s Island 12
Leslie, D. 17
libidinal development 103, 105
Loango 53
Logea 46
Long, J. 4
Low, H. 45
Lozano, P. 64
Lubbock, J. 16, 129
McLennan, J. F. 4, 117, 127, 140
Macbeth 45
Madagascar 63
magic: and cannibalism 95; and
sorcery 91–6; bond between
wound and weapon 95;
contagious 95–9; eﬃgies 92;
fertility 93; homoeopathic 94;
imitative 95, 97, 98; of kings 48,
56; of names 65, 67, 95; rain 93,
94
males, bands of 164–9
Mana 22, 24, 38, 40
manism 88
Maori 32, 60, 68, 112
Maori, A Pakeha 51
Marett, R. R. 88, 105, 106
Marillier, L. 162
Mariner, W. 61
Masai 64
masturbation, prohibition of 149,
152
matriarchy 167

Mauss, M. 91, 163
Max-Müller, F. 118
Mekeo 62
Mikado 52–5
Mithras 178
Mongols of Tartary 63
Monumbo 46
Mother Earth 177
mother-goddesses 173
mother-in-law: ambivalent relation
17; and son-in-law in civilized
communities 14–20; avoidance
12–20; jokes 17
Morgan, L. H. 7, 141
Motumotu 46
mourning: and name taboos 62, 65,
66; and sacriﬁces 163, 176;
customs 62, 63; function of; 76
Moustier, M. 58
Müller, S. 46
names: signiﬁcance of to children
and savages 65, 130; signiﬁcance
of to obsessional neurotics 66; of
the dead, taboo 64–8
Nandi 63
narcissism 103–5, 108
Natchez 47
necessity and cultural products, 108
New Britain 12
New Caledonia 12, 165
New Guinea 46, 47
New Hebrides 11
New Mecklenburg 12
New Mexico 162
New South Wales 5
Nicobar Islands 63, 67
Nilus, St. 161, 178
Niue 54
Noa 21, 22
Norwich 96
Nuba 48

index
nuclear complex of neurosis 20, 37,
149, 181
obedience, deferred 166
obsessional neurosis: and conscience
80; and omnipotence of thoughts
99; and sense of guilt 80–2; and
taboo compared 31–3, 40–2
obsessional prohibitions:
displacement of 32, 33, 35;
lacking in motive 31, 32, 33
obsessive acts 33, 35, 42, 59, 101,
102
obsessive self-reproach 69, 70, 77
Œdipus 80, 94, 153
Œdipus complex 149, 151, 153,
167, 181
original sin 178
omnipotence of thoughts: and art
105; origin of term 99
Orpheus 178, 180
Osage 44
Ouataouak 161
Palawan 62
Paloo 43
Paraguay 64
paranoia 50, 108, 111
Parkinson, R. 12
patriarchal societies 173
Paulitschke, P. 44
pavor nocturnus 149
Peckel, P. G. 13
persecution delusions 50
Philippine Islands 62, 63
Phobias: animal 147–9; dog 149,
152–3; horse 149
Phratries 10–11
Pickler, J. 128
Pima 47
Pliny 96
Port Patteson 14

prohibitions and underlying desires
80, 82
projection 71–3, 108, 109
psychical reality and sense of guilt
185–7
puberty ceremonies and avoidances
12
puriﬁcation ceremonies 23, 47
Ra 92
rain magic 93, 94
Rank, O. 20, 151, 152
razors, in a neurosis 112
regression 20
Reinach, S. 90, 105 118, 125, 131,
177, 180
reincarnation theory of the Arunta
133, 136
Reitler, R. 151
religion: and father-complex 169;
origin of 116, 165
renunciation 33, 40, 41
repression 35
restrictions upon a victorious slayer,
35, 46, 47
Ribbe, C. 14
Richard III 45
Rivers, W. H. R. 137
Roth, H. Ling 94
rulers: authority over nature 51, 53,
56, 59; danger of contact with
49–51, 56; godlike power of 51–3;
healing touch of 49, 56; magic
powers of 48, 56; privileged 55–6;
responsibility of 52–5; restrictions
imposed on 52–4; to be guarded
48, 51–3, 56; to be guarded
against 48–51; unconscious
hostility to 57, 60
sacriﬁce: 154–62, 171, 174, 175;
and feasting 156; animal 155,

199

200 index
157–62, 175; by ﬁre 155; drinkoﬀering 156; human 162, 175; in
ancient Semitic religions 154, 175,
176; theanthropic 175, 176;
vegetable 155
sacriﬁcial meal 156–62
Samoyeds 63
Sancho Panza 60
Sarawak 44
Savage, Dr. 146
Savage Island 54
Schelling 89
Schopenhauer 102
Schreber, D. P. 108
scrofula 49
secondary revision and the
construction of systems 75,
111–12
Shark Point 53
Shuswap 62
Siberia 63
Sierra Leone 54, 58
Silberer, H. 175
Smith, W. Robertson 154–62, 163, 165,
166, 171, 175, 176, 180
social instincts 84–6
Solomon Islands 14
Somló, F. 128
Sophocles 94
sorcery and magic 91
soul: animals 138; external 135;
primitive conception of 89, 109,
110; transmigration of 137
Spencer, B. 8, 132, 135, 136, 141
Spencer, H. 88, 90, 109, 128
spirits: and the unconscious 110;
creation of 109; doctrine of 107;
evil 108
Stekel, W. 66
Storfer, A. J. 11
Sully, J. 105
Sumatra 13

superstition 113–15
system-formation and secondary
revision 75, 111–12
taboo: and conscience 78, 79; and
enemies 42; and magic or demonic
power 25, 26, 28, 29; and
obsessional neurosis 30, 85; and
penal systems 24, 84; and
symptomatic acts 115;
classiﬁcation of 22; meaning of 21,
26, 77, 78; objects of 23–4; on
names 63–7; on rulers 48; on the
dead 60; on widows 62; origin of
36; punishment for violation of
24, 25, 39, 83; sacred and unclean
21, 29, 77, 78; sickness 30;
transmissibility of; 24, 25, 32, 33,
38, 40, 48, 84; Wundt’s account of
26–30
Talion, law of 178
Tammuz 177
Tasmania 63
Ta-ta-thi 5
Taylor, R. 33, 51, 68
Teit, J. A. 62
temptation to imitate 38–40, 71, 84
Thomas, N. W. 22, 97
Timmes 58
Timor 43, 46
Tinguiane 63
Titans 178–9
Toaripi 46
Toda 63
Tonga 61
totem: ancestor of the clan 3, 121,
123, 125, 152; and bloodrelationships 4, 7; clan 3, 120,
122; deﬁnition of 3–4; eating of
prohibited 3, 121, 123; Frazer’s
account of 120–3; individual 120;
inheritance of 4, 7; kangaroo and

index
emu 6; killing of prohibited 3, 38,
121, 167; sex 120
totem animal: father substitute 152,
164, 167, 172; identiﬁcation with
122, 152
totem meal 154, 161–2, 163–5, 171,
179
totemic festivals 3
totemic religion and the sense of guilt
168
totemism: countries in which found
4; essential characteristics of 124;
nominalist theories 128–32;
origin of 127–39; psychological
theories 135–9; Reinach’s code
of 118–19; 125; religious and social
121, 124; sociological theories
131–5; Wundt’s account of
123–4; and taboo restrictions 39;
prohibition against in early
childhood 34, 35
touching phobia 32, 34–6, 39, 85
Tuareg 63, 67

Tylor, E. B. 17, 88, 90, 92, 97
unconscious positive desires 82, 83
Urabunna 8
vampires 69
Vanua Lava 14
Victoria 64
Wakamba 13
washing mania 33
Westermarck, E. 8, 68, 69, 72, 142, 143
widows, taboo 62
Wilken, G. A. 94, 137
will and wishes 98–9
Wulif, M. 148
Wundt, W. ix, 4, 22, 26–30, 68, 72,
76, 77, 88, 89, 90, 107, 118, 123,
138
Zulu 16
Zuni 162
Zweifel, J. 58

201

