

STUDIES OF THE WARBURG INSTITUTE 
EDITED BY J. B. TRAPP 
VOL. 40, 1 



THE OPTICS 
OF 

IBN AL-HAYTHAM 

BOOKS I— III 
On Direct Vision 


Translated with Introduction 
and Commentary 
by 

A. I. SABRA 

Harvard University 


I 

TRANSLATION 


LONDON 

THE WARBURG INSTITUTE 
UNIVERSITY OF LONDON 
1989 


© THE WARBURG INSTITUTE, 1989 
ISBN o 85481 072 2 


Printed in Great Britain by 

W. S. MANEY AND SON LIMITED, LEEDS 


The Warburg Institute gratefully acknowledges the generous financial 
assistance of the Sabah al-Salem al-Mubarak al-Sabah Foundation, Kuwait, 
in the publication of these volumes. 



CONTENTS 


PART I 

Translation of the Optics of Ibn al-Haytham 
Books I— III: On Direct Vision 


BOOK I. ON THE MANNER OF VISION IN GENERAL Page 

Chapter i. Preface to the [whole] book ..... 3 

Chapter 2. Inquiry into the properties of sight .... 6 

Chapter 3. Inquiry into the properties of lights and into the 

manner of radiation of lights . . . . . 13 

Chapter 4. On the effect of light upon sight . . . . 51 

Chapter 5. On the structure of the eye . . . . 55 

Chapter 6. On the manner of vision . ..... 63 

Chapter 7. On the utilities of the instruments of sight . . 100 

Chapter 8. On the reasons for the conditions without the 

combination of which vision is not effected . . 104 

BOOK II. ON THE VISIBLE PROPERTIES, THEIR CAUSES AND THE MANNER OF 

THEIR PERCEPTION 

Chapter 1. Preface. . . . . . . 113 

Chapter 2. On distinguishing the lines of the ray . 114 

Chapter 3. On the manner of perceiving each of the particular 

visible properties ....... 126 

Perception ofLight and Colour .... 142 

Perception of Distance ..... 149 

Perception of Position . .158 

Perception of Solidity ..... 168 

Perception of Shape . . . 171 

Perception of Size ...... 173 

Perception of Separation ..... 191 

Perception of Continuity ..... 192 

Perception of Number ..... 192 

Perception of Motion ..... 193 

Perception of Rest ...... 196 

Perception of Roughness . . . . . 196 

Perception of Smoothness ..... 197 

Perception ofTransparency .... 198 


Contents 


viii 

Perception of Opacity 199 

Perception of Shadow ..... 199 

Perception of Darkness ..... 200 

Perception of Beauty ..... 200 

Perception of Ugliness ..... 206 

Perception of Similarity ..... 207 

Perception of Dissimilarity .... 207 

Chapter 4. On distinguishing [the ways in which] sight 

perceives visible objects ...... 207 


BOOK III. ON ERRORS OF DIRECT VISION AND THEIR CAUSES 

Chapter 1. Preface ......... 227 

Chapter 2. On what needs to be advanced for clarifying the 

discussion on errors of sight ..... 228 

Chapter 3. On the causes of errors of sight .... 250 
Chapter 4. On distinguishing errors of sight .... 258 

Chapter 5. On the ways in which sight errs in pure sensation - 262 

Chapter 6. On the ways in which sight errs in recognition 267 

Chapter 7. On the ways in which sight errs in inference 277 

A. Errors of sight in inference when the distance of the 

visible object falls outside the moderate range 278 

B. Errors of sight in inference when the position of the 

visible object falls outside the moderate range 3°3 

C. Errors of sight in inference when the illumination in the 

visible object falls outside the moderate range 315 

D. Errors of sight in inference when the size of the visible 

object falls outside the moderate range . 324 

E. Errors of sight in inference when the opacity of the 

visible object falls outside the moderate range . 332 

F. Errors of sight in inference when the transparency of the 

air falls outside the moderate range . . . 340 

G. Errors of sight in inference when the duration of percep- 

tion falls outside the moderate range . 346 

H. Errors of sight in inference when the condition of the eye 

falls outside the moderate range . . . .356 

PART II 

Frontispiece. Frontispiece to F. Risner, Opticae Thesaurus , 1572 


PREFACE 


xi 


Contents ix 

ABBREVIATIONS XVi 

INTRODUCTION 

I. Sources for the life and works of Ibn al-Haytham . . xix 

II. Ibnal-Haytham’s writings on light and vision . . xxxii 

III. Aim and scope of the Optics liii 

IV. The Tanqlh al-Manazir of Kamalal-Din al-Farisi lxiv 

, V. The medieval Latin translation of the Optics and Risner’s 

edition of 1572 lxxiii 

VI. Manuscripts of Kitab al-Manazir Ixxx 

VII. Edition of the Arabic text and English translation of the 

Optics , Books I-II-III lxxxiii 

VIII. Synopsis of the Optics, Books I-II-III . . lxxxvii 

COMMENTARY 

Book I 3 

Plates 1-4 following p. 42 

Book II ......... 62 

Book III .......... 106 

ARABIC-LATIN GLOSSARY 144 

LATIN-ARABIC GLOSSARY 173 

* CONCORDANCE OF THE ARABIC AND LATIN TEXTS . . . .205 

K BIBLIOGRAPHY 213 

INDEX OF MANUSCRIPTS CITED 229 

1 GENERAL INDEX 23 1 



BOOK I 

ON THE MANNER OF VISION 
IN GENERAL 


In the Name of God the Compassionate and Merciful 


3 


Superscript numbers in the translation refer to 
similarly numbered notes in the Commentary 


I. i 


I ib 


THE FIRST BOOK 
OF THE OPTICS 

OF ABU 'ALI AL-HASAN IBN AL-HASAN IBN AL-HAYTHAM 


i 


I 2a 


THE CHAPTERS OF THIS BOOK 
WHICH ARE EIGHT 


Chapter i: 
Chapter 2: 
Chapter 3: 

Chapter 4: 
Chapter 5: 
Chapter 6: 
Chapter 7: 
Chapter 8: 


Preface to the [whole] book 
Inquiry into the properties of sight 

Inquiry into the properties of lights and into the manner of 
radiation of lights 

On the effect of light upon sight 

On the structure of the eye 

On the manner of vision 

On the utilities of the instruments of sight 

On the reasons for the conditions without the combination of 
which vision is not effected 


CHAPTER 1 

PREFACE TO THE [WHOLE] BOOK 

[1] Early investigators diligently pursued the inquiry into the manner of 
visual sensation and applied their thoughts and effort to it, eventually reaching 
the limit to which their investigation had led, and gaining as much knowledge 
of this matter as their inquiry and judgement had yielded. | Nevertheless, their 
views on the nature of vision are divergent and their doctrines regarding the 
manner of sensation not concordant. Thus, perplexity prevails, certainty is 
hard to come by, and there is no assurance of attaining the object of inquiry. 
How strong, in addition to all this, is the excuse for the truth to be confused, 
and how manifest is the proof that certainty is difficult to achieve! For the 
truths are obscure, the ends hidden, the doubts manifold, the minds turbid, 
the reasonings various; the premisses are gleaned from the senses, and the 
senses (which are our tools) are not immune from error. The path of 
investigation is therefore obliterated and the inquirer, however diligent, is not 
infallible. Consequently, when inquiry concerns subtle matters, perplexity 



4 


Optics 


5 


grows, views diverge, opinions vary, conclusions differ and certainty i :b 

becomes difficult to obtain. 

[2] Our subject is obscure and the way leading to knowledge of its nature 

difficult; moreover, our inquiry requires a combination of the natural and the 
mathematical sciences. It is dependent on the natural sciences because vision is 
one of the senses and these belong to natural things. It is dependent on the 
mathematical sciences because sight perceives shape, position, magnitude, 1 

movement and rest, in addition | to its being characterized by straight lines; 

and since it is the mathematical sciences that investigate these things, the 
inquiry into our subject truly combines the natural and the mathematical 
sciences. 

[3] Natural scientists have inquired into the nature of this subject according 
to their art 1 and exerted themselves in it as much as they could. The learned 
among them settled upon the opinion that vision is effected by a form which 

comes from the visible object to the eye and through which sight perceives the . 1 4* 

form of the object. Mathematicians, for their part, have paid more attention to 
this science 1 than others. They have pursued its investigation, paying atten- 
tion to its details and divisions. 2 They have distinguished objects of vision, 
assigning causes to their particular properties and stating reasons for each of 
them. All the same, they have continued throughout the ages to disagree 
about the principles of this subject, with the result that the opinions of the 
various groups among the practitioners of this art 1 have gone different ways. 

But for all the disparity in their ranks, their different epochs and the diver- ■ 

gence of their views, in general they agree that vision is effected by a ray which j 

issues from the eye to the visible object and by means of which sight perceives 

the object; that this ray | extends in straight lines whose extremities meet at the 

centre of the eye; and that each ray through which a visible object is perceived 

has as a whole the shape of a cone the vertex of which is the centre of the eye 

and the base is the surface of the visible object. These two notions, I mean the 

opinion of the physicists and that of the mathematicians, appear to diverge and 

contradict one another if taken at their face value. 

[4] Mathematicians, moreover, differ about the structure of this ray and 
about the manner of its production. Some take the view that the radial cone is a 
solid body, continuous and compact. Others think that the ray consists of 
straight lines which are fine bodies the extremities of which meet at the centre 
of the eye and divergently extend until they reach the visible object; and that 
sight perceives those parts of the surface of the object which the extremities of 
these lines encounter, whereas the parts of the object’s surface that fall 
between those extremities are not perceived. Thus it comes about that the 
extremely small parts and minute pores in the surfaces of visible objects are 
invisible. Again, a group among those who believe the radial cone to be solid 


I. 1 

and compact thinks | that the ray issues from the eye in one straight line until it 
reaches the object, after which it moves extremely quickly over the length and 
breadth of the surface of the object — so quickly in fact that the movement is 
imperceptible — and through this movement the solid cone is produced. 
Another group believes the matter to be different and that when the eyelids 
open in front of an object, the cone is immediately produced, all at once, in no 
sensible time. A group from among all of these thinks the vision-producing 
ray to be a luminous power which issues forth from the eye to the visible 
object, and that sensation is brought about by that power. Another group is of 
the opinion that when the air comes into contact with the eye it receives from 
the eye only a certain quality which immediately turns the air into a ray 
through which sight perceives the visible objects. 

[5] Each of those groups was led to its belief by reasonings, arguments, 
methods and evidence of its own. But the settled view of all those who have 
inquired into the manner of visual sensation | divides on the whole into the 
two contrary doctrines which we mentioned earlier. Now, for any two 
different doctrines, it is either the case that one of them is true and the other 
false; or they are both false, the truth being other than either of them; or they 
both lead to one thing which is the truth. [In the latter case] each of the groups 
holding those two doctrines would have failed to complete its inquiry and, 
unable to reach the end, has stopped short of it. Alternatively, one of them 
may have reached the end but the other has stopped short of it, thus giving rise 
to the apparent difference between the two doctrines, although the end would 
have been the same had the investigation been pushed further. Disagreement 
may also arise in regard to the subject of an inquiry as a result of a difference in 
methods of research, but when the inquiry is rightly conducted and the 
investigation intensified, agreement will emerge and the difference will be 
settled. 

[6] That being the case, and the nature of our subject being confused, in 
addition to the continued disagreement through the ages among investigators 
who have undertaken to examine it, and because the manner of vision has not 
been ascertained, we have thought it appropriate that we direct our attention 
to this subject as much as we can, and seriously apply ourselves to it, and 
examine it, and diligently inquire into its nature. We should, that is, recom- 
mence the inquiry into its principles and premisses, beginning our investiga- 
tion with an inspection of the things that exist and a survey of the conditions of 
visible objects. We should distinguish the properties of particulars, and gather 
by induction what pertains to the eye when vision takes place and what is 
found in the manner of sensation to be uniform, unchanging, manifest and not 
subject to doubt. After which we should ascend in our inquiry and reasonings, 
gradually and orderly, criticizing premisses and exercising caution in regard 


6 


7 


Optics 

to conclusions — our aim in all that we make subject to inspection and review 
being to employjustice, not to follow prejudice, and to take care in all that we 
judge and criticize that we seek the truth and not to be swayed by opinion. We 
may in this way eventually come to the truth that gratifies the heart and 
gradually and carefully reach the end at which certainty appears; while 
through criticism and caution we may seize the truth that dispels disagreement 
and resolves doubtful matters. For all that, we are not free from that human 
turbidity which is in the nature of man; but we must do our best with what we 
possess of human power. From God we derive support in all things. 

[7] We divide this work into seven Books. 1 2 In Book I we show the manner 
of vision generally. In Book II we detail the visible properties, their causes and 

Ub the manner of their perception. | In Book III we show the errors of sight in 

what it perceives directly, and their causes. In Book IV we show the manner 
of visual perception by reflection from smooth bodies. In Book V we show 
the positions of images, namely the forms seen inside smooth bodies. In 
Book VI we show the errors of sight in what it perceives by reflection, and 
their causes. In Book VII we show the manner of visual perception by 
refraction through transparent bodies whose transparency differs from that of 
air. And with the end of this Book we conclude this work. 

[8] We formerly composed a treatise 1 on the science of optics in which we 
often followed persuasive methods of reasoning; but when true demonstra- 
tions relating to all objects of vision occurred to us, we started afresh the 
composition of this book. Whoever, therefore, comes upon the said treatise 
must know that it should be discarded, for the notions expressed in it are 
included in the content of the present work. 

CHAPTER 2 

INQUIRY INTO THE PROPERTIES OF SIGHT 

[1] We find that sight does not perceive any visible object unless there is 
some distance between them. For when the object is in contact with the 

1 5a surface of the eye it is not perceived by sight, even though it is a proper | object 

of visual perception. 

[2] And we find that sight does not perceive any of the visible objects that 
are situated with it in the same atmosphere, and are not perceived by 
reflection, unless the object is placed opposite the eye; and provided that 
between each point on the perceived surface of the object and the surface of the 
eye a straight line (or lines) can be imagined; and provided that there does not 
intervene between the surface of the eye and the object any opaque body that 
interrupts all the straight lines imagined to lie between the surface of the eye 
and the perceived surface of the object. 


I. 2 

[3] Further, for any seen object that is situated with the eye in the same air 
and is not perceived by reflection, we find that if all the straight lines imagined 
between the surface of the eye and the perceived surface of the object are 
interrupted by an opaque body, then the object will be concealed from the eye 
and cease to be perceptible, even though a continuum of air free from opaque 
objects may still exist between the eye and the object, provided that this 

1 s b continuity is not rectilinear. | Then, if the opaque screen is removed, the sight 

will perceive the object. 

[4] Suppose now that the screen intersects all straight lines between any part 
of the surface of the object and the surface of the eye, so that every straight line 
between that part of the object and the point on the surface of the eye through 
which vision occurs is interrupted by the screen. Then only that part of the 
object will disappear which is such that the straight lines between it and the 
point of vision on the surface of the eye have all been interrupted by the screen. 

[5] If a survey is made of all visible objects at all times, and if they are 
experimentally and accurately examined, they will be found to be uniformly 
as we have described them, with no variation or change. This therefore proves 
that for every seen object that exists with the eye in the same atmosphere, and 
is not perceived by reflection, there exists between each point on the seen 
surface of the object and a certain point or multiplicity of points on the surface 
of the eye a straight line or lines which are not interrupted by any opaque 
body. 

j [6] An accurate experimental examination of this fact may be easily made 

1 6a with the help of rulers | and tubes. Let the experimenter who wishes to make 

such an examination [proceed as follows]. Take a very sound and straight 
; ruler and draw along the middle of its surface a straight line parallel to its 

| sides. 1 Take a hollow cylindrical tube, very straight in length, perfectly round 

J and ending in parallel circles; let its thickness be the same throughout and let it 

be fairly wide but not wider than the eye socket; draw on its outer surface a 
straight line extending from a point on the circumference of one base to the 
opposite point on the other side; and let this tube be a little shorter in length 
than the ruler. Divide the line along the middle of the ruler into three parts, 
and let the intermediate part be of the same length as the line on the surface of 
the tube; the remaining parts on either side may be of any length. Attach the 
tube to the surface of the ruler, placing the line on its exterior upon the 
1 6b intermediate segment of the line in the middle of the ruler’s surface; | and make 

sure that the ends of the tube coincide with the points marking off the middle 
segment. The tube should be so closely and firmly fastened that it cannot be 
loosened or displaced. 

[7] When the instrument has been perfectly prepared and the experimenter 
wishes to examine the perception of visible objects by sight, he should aim at 


2 



8 Optics 

one of these objects, put one end of this ruler close to the lower eyelid of one 
eye and the other end close to the surface of the object, cover the other eye, 
and, while in this condition, look through the opening in the tube: he will see 
that part of the object which is opposite the opening of the tube at the end of 
the ruler. If he covers the opening of the tube with an opaque body, that part of 
the object will be screened off which he has seen through the opening. Upon 
removing the cover, he will perceive the same part as he did at first. If, by 
means of the opaque body, he covers any part of the opening, then there will 
be screened off only that portion of the visible part situated opposite the 
covered part of the opening, namely the portion that lies on a straight line with 
the eye and the screening body 1 — this straightness being secured by the ruler 

?a and the straightness of | the tube. For the portion of the visible part which is 

screened off when a part of the opening is covered always lies together with 
the eye and the covered part of the opening in a line parallel to the straight line 
extending along the middle of the ruler’s surface parallel to its length. When 
the cover is removed, the eye will again perceive that same portion of the 
visible object. That is always found to be so, with no variation or change. 

[8] Now when the observer looks at the visible object through the opening 
in the tube while the ruler lies between the eye and the object, and the opening 
is obstructed so as to hide that part of the object’s surface which the eye 
formerly perceived, there will exist in this situation between that part of the 
visible object and the surface of the eye a continuum of air that is free from 
opaque bodies and an infinity of non-rectilinear distances. For open air exists 
between one end of the tube and the eye, and likewise between the object and 
the other end of the tube. But the continuum of air that exists between the eye 

?b and the object is not in this case | rectilinear. And of all the lines that can be 

imagined between the eye and that part of the visible object, only the straight 
lines have in this case been interrupted. Thus, if it were possible for sight to 
perceive an object existing with it in the same atmosphere through non- 
rectilinear lines, then it would perceive that part of the object opposite the 
tube’s opening after the opening has been obstructed. But we find, when such 
an object is experimentally examined and observed in the manner we have 
described, that it ceases to be visible upon closing the opening. 

[9] It follows from this experiment, with a necessity that dispels doubt, that 
sight does not perceive any visible object existing with it in the same 
atmosphere, this perception being not by reflection, except through the 
straight lines alone that can be imagined to extend between the surface of the 
object and the surface of the eye. 

[10] Again, we find that sight does not perceive any visible object unless 
there exists in the object some light which the object either possesses of itself 

Ha or which radiates upon it from another object. If | the object is dark and has no 


I. 2 9 

light whatever in it, it will not be perceived or sensed by sight. We also find 
that when the eye is in a dark place it perceives the objects facing it if they are 
illuminated by some light and if the intermediate atmosphere is continuous 
and uninterrupted by any opaque body. If the object is in a dark place that has 
no light, and the eye is situated in an illuminated place, then that object will 
not be perceived or sensed by sight. And we find this state of affairs to be 
uniform and without variation or change. This therefore proves that if the 
object has some light in it, and it is one of the possible objects of visual 
perception, and if the light in it is up to the limit that may be perceived by 
sight, then sight will perceive that object whether or not the air surrounding 
the eye is illuminated by a different light from that which is in the object. 

[n] Further, we find that sight does not perceive any visible object unless 
the object is of a certain size (by ‘size’ 1 mean the measure of the object, be it a 
I sb body, a surface | or a line), and it does not perceive extremely small objects. It 

is discovered by reasoning that there exist small bodies which cannot in any 
way be perceived by sight. For the pupil of a mosquito’s eye and similarly 
small things are not in any way perceptible by sight, even though they are 
existing bodies. The smallest magnitudes that can be perceived by sight are 
also related to the strength or weakness of sight. For some small bodies are 
perceived and sensed by some people but cannot in any way be seen by many 
others whose sight is not very strong. When all visible objects, including the 
smallest, are experimentally examined, they are found to be not extremely 
> small. Rather, for any visible object, even a very small one, it is possible to find 

I among existing bodies one which is smaller than that object and which is not 

sensible to sight. This proves that no visible object is perceptible by sight 
f unless it has a certain size or [it is something] belonging to an object of a certain 

19a size, such as colour, shape and the like. | And, therefore, the smallest 

magnitudes that can be perceived by sight are related to the power of sight. 

[12] We also find that sight does not perceive any visible object unless the 
object is opaque or has some opacity in it. For when the body is extremely 
transparent (such as rarefied air) sight does not perceive it but perceives what is 
behind it. Sight does not sense a transparent body unless it is denser than the 
intermediate air between itself and the eye. But every opaque body has a 
colour or something like colour, 1 such as the light of the stars and the forms of 
[self-]luminous bodies. Similarly, no transparent body with any opacity in it 
I can be devoid of colour. 

I [13] Moreover, we find that when sight perceives some visible object, then 

moves a considerable distance away from it, the object ceases to be perceived. 
And we find that when sight moves so far from the object that the object ceases 
to be visible, it is still able to perceive from the same distance (unless it is too 
far) another object of a greater size than that of the invisible object. This 


10 


II 


Optics 

therefore shows that the distances from which a visible object can be perceived 

1 9b and the distances at which | it disappears depend on the size of the object. 

[14] Furthermore, we find that the distances from which sight can perceive 
visible objects vary with the lights existing in these objects: a more intensely 
illuminated object may be perceived by sight from a distance at which objects of 
equal size are invisible — given that the lights in these objects are fainter than the 
light of that object. For let a fire at some place be surrounded by objects or bodies 
each of which is equal in size to the bulk of the fire (or not greatly different from 
it) and illuminated by the light of that fire. A man approaching the fire from a 
considerable distance in a dark night will see the fire before he sees any of the 
objects or bodies surrounding it, although they are equal to or greater than the 
fire and are illuminated by its light. When that man approaches the fire there will 

1 10a appear to him the objects round the fire and close to it. Those | objects nearer the 

fire and of strong light will appear before those which are farther from it and of 
faintlight. Then, when he reaches the fire, there will appear to him all the visible 
objects round and near it. Similarly, when we experimentally examine distant 
visible objects in daylight we find that those illuminated by sunlight or by 
strong lights appear from distances at which there disappear the objects of equal 
size and colour when they are in the shadow or illuminated by faint light. 

[15] It follows from this that the distances from which sight can perceive 
visible objects and the distances at which they become invisible vary with the 
lights existing in those objects. 

[16] We also find that brilliant-white and bright-coloured bodies are visible 
from distances at which dull, earthy and dark bodies 1 disappear from view, 
even when the bodies are identical in size and light and all other conditions 

1 [ob except colour. Thus when ships are sailing at a great distance in the sea, | their 
sails, if white, look like stars from the distance; sight perceives their whiteness 
but not the ships themselves nor anything in them that is not brilliant white as 
long as they are far distant. Then, when the ships approach the eye they and 
their contents become visible, even though sight was not previously able to 
perceive them when it perceived only their sails. 

[17] It is similarly the case with objects on the surface of the ground when 
they are of equal (or not very different) size and of different colours (some 
being brilliant white, others of bright colours and yet others of earthy or dull 
colours) 1 and all are illuminated by the same light: if someone approaches 
them from a considerable distance he will see the brilliant white objects before 
any of the others; when he comes nearer, the bright-coloured objects will 
appear before those of the earthy or dull colours; 1 then as he comes nearer still, 

1 ira the others will become visible, until they are all | apparent. 

[18] It follows from this that the distances from which objects can be seen and 
the distances at which they cease to be visible are according to the objects' colour. 


I. 2 

[19] We also find that the distances from which an object can be seen, and 
the distances at which it ceases to be visible, are according to the power of 
sight. For a man of keen sight may perceive an object from a distance at which 
that same object would not be visible under the same conditions to a man of 
weak sight. 

[20] It follows from what we have stated and gathered by induction 
regarding distances that the distances from which an object can be perceived 
and those at which an object becomes invisible are according to the conditions 
and properties of the object itself, and also according to the strength or 
weakness of the sight itself that perceives it. 

[21] Therefore, from all that we have stated and found by induction and 
1 n b experiment | to be uniform and subject to no variation or contradiction, it is 

evident that sight does not perceive any object that exists with it in the same air 
and is not perceived by reflection, unless that object combines the conditions 
we have stated — namely: that there exists between it and the eye a certain 
distance proportionate to that object; that it lies opposite the eye — I mean that 
an imaginary line exists between each point on its visible surface and a certain 
point on the surface of the eye; that light exists in it, whether from itself or 
from another object; that it is of a certain size in relation to the sensitive power 
of the eye; that the air or body between it and the surface of the eye is of a 
continuous transparency uninterrupted by any opaque body; that it is opaque, 
or of some opacity — I mean that it is either non-transparent or its transpar- 
ency is denser than that of the air or of the transparent body extending 
between it and the surface of the eye — [it being understood that] an opaque 
body must possess colour or something like colour, 1 and the same is true of a 
1 na transparent body with some density in it. | These, then, are the conditions 
which must combine in a visible object for vision to be effected. When these 
conditions combine in an object, and sight is free from defects, it will perceive 
that object. When sight lacks one of these conditions, it will not perceive the 
object in respect of which that condition is lacking. That being so, these 
conditions are therefore the characteristic properties of sight without the 
concurrence of which vision cannot be accomplished. 

[22] It is also manifest by induction that if any seen object is moved away 
from the eye to the limit where it becomes invisible, then between the point at 
which that object disappears and the surface of the eye there exist many 
different distances which cannot be enumerated or determined and from each 
of which the eye truly perceives that object and all of its parts and visible 

1 12b properties. If the eye acquires a true perception of the object at one of these | 
distances, then moves away from it gradually and in orderly manner, those 
small parts and fine features (if such exist in the object), like designs, 1 
incisions, creases or dots, will disappear before the object disappears as a 


12 Optics 

whole, and the smaller and finer among these features will disappear before 
those that are larger and more gross. The distances at which the small parts 
become invisible and the fine features confused and indistinct are found to be 
many, indeterminate and unlimited. 

[23] Also, if the object moves farther and farther away, gradually in an 
orderly manner, it is found that it is perceived as progressively smaller in its 
entirety until it disappears altogether. And if it continues to move away, it will 
eventually reach the limit at which it completely disappears so that neither it 
nor any part of it will be sensed by sight. If it moves farther still, sight will not 
perceive it. 

[24] Again, if the visible object closely approaches the eye, without actually 
coming into contact with the surface of the eye, it is found to grow in size. Its 

form becomes indistinct and the minute details of it are so combined that sight 1 

fails to discriminate between or identify them. As it approaches | the surface of 

the eye after this condition is reached, it becomes more and more confused, > 

until it comes into contact with the surface of the eye and sight ceases to sense 

it and perceives its covering effect only. 

[25] All that being the case, the distance from which sight properly 
perceives a visible object is therefore not a single, determinate distance; and 
the distance at which the form of the object becomes indistinct and its small 
parts and subtle features become inapparent, indistinct and confused, is not a 
single, determinate distance. Let us call ‘moderate distances’ all those distances 
(which are many and [variable] within a certain range) from which sight 
perceives the visible object and all those of its parts and properties that can be 
perceived by sight — this perception of the object and of its properties being 
such that between it and the real nature of the object and of its properties there 
exists no appreciable discrepancy, and such that the object’s form produced in 
the sense[-faculty] is not so different from its real form as to show an 
appreciable discrepancy when contemplated and scrutinized by that sight 
itself . 1 | And let us call ‘immoderate distances’ those distances at which the 

visible object disappears, and those at which there disappear those parts of the j 

object that bear an appreciable ratio to the whole object, and the distances at ^ 

which there disappear those subtle features of the object that may be visible * 

from the moderate distances, and also the distances at which these features 
become confused and indistinct — regardless of whether these distances are 
exceedingly far from the eye or exceedingly near to it. 

[26] It is thus evident that sight does not perceive any visible object unless 
the object has some light in it either from itself or from another object; and that 
the light of many visible bodies appears on the bodies situated opposite them 

and that their light appears on the eye that perceives them. We must now i 

inquire into the properties of lights and into the manner of their radiation, and 


I. 3 *3 

further inquire into the effect of light upon sight; we must subsequently add to 
this what pertains to the eye, and by careful reasoning work our way to the 
conclusion. 

CHAPTER 3 

INQUIRY INTO THE PROPERTIES OF LIGHTS 
AND INTO THE MANNER OF RADIATION OF LIGHTS 

j I4J | [1] We find that the light of every self-luminous body radiates on every 

body opposite to it when there is not between them an opaque or non- 
transparent body that screens one from the other. For when the sun faces a 
body on the ground that is not screened from it, its light shines upon that body 
and is visible, and it simultaneously irradiates every place in all parts of the 
earth that face it at that time. It is similarly the case with the moon , 1 and also 
with fire: when [the latter] lies opposite an opaque body and there is no opaque 
screen between them and the intervening distance is not excessively large, the 
light of the fire will radiate on that body and its form will be visible. Again, the 
light of a fire-brand is found to radiate simultaneously on all bodies surround- 
ing that fire on all sides, and on all opaque bodies above or below it, provided 
that they are not hidden from it by a screen and their distances are not too large 

1 t 4 b — whether the fire-brand is small | or large, so long as its light is visible on the 
opaque bodies that face it. 

[2] We also find that the radiation of all lights takes place only in straight 
lines and that no light radiates from a luminous object except in straight lines 
— provided that the air or transparent body between the luminous object and 
the body on which the light appears is continuous and of similar transparency. 

[ 3 ] When this state of affairs is examined at all times it is found to be 
uniform, suffering no variation or change. This becomes clearly apparent to 
sense if one examines the lights that enter through holes, slits and doors into 
dusty chambers. As for the light of the sun, when it enters through a hole into 
a dark chamber the air of which is cloudy with dust or smoke, the light will 

1 15a appear to extend rectilinearly from the hole through which the light enters | to 

the place on the chamber’s floor or walls which that light reaches. If the air in 
the chamber is clear and pure and the extension of the light through it is not 
visible, and if an experimenter wishes to examine the interval through which 
the light extends, then let him take an opaque body and, approaching the 
rectilinear interval between the hole and the place on the chamber’s floor or 
walls where the light is, let him intercept it by the opaque body: he will find 
that the light will appear on that opaque body and vanish from the place where 
it showed on the chamber’s floor or walls. If he approaches any position he 


H 


15 


Optics 

chooses on the straight line between the hole and the place where the light 
1 15b appears, and intercepts the interval with the opaque body, | the light will 

appear on that opaque body and vanish from the place in which it [formerly] 
appeared. (The straightness of this interval can be tested with a straight rod.) 
This state of affairs thus shows that the light that entered through the hole 
extends in a straight line between the hole and the place reached by the light. If 
the experimenter examines any interval he chooses among the crooked, bent 
or curved intervals between the hole and the place where the light appears, 
intercepting it by the [opaque] body, no light will appear [at any point] in that 
interval. It is so with minute holes in opaque bodies. When sunlight irradiates 
such bodies, it passes through their tiny holes, extending in straight lines. If 
one tests the straight distance between the tiny hole and the place where the 
light from the hole appears, the light will be found to extend the whole length 
1 1 6a of that straight interval, even if the hole is very small. | Let an experimenter 

take an opaque body and, having made a minute hole in it, let him hold it 
opposite the body of the sun: he will find that the light goes through the hole, 
extending on a straight line. If he tests the interval 1 on which the light just 
described has extended by applying a ruler to it, he will find it to be perfectly 
straight. It is therefore clear from all this that the light of the sun only extends 
along straight lines. 

[4] Similarly, if the light of the moon is tested, 1 it will be found to be of this 
description. And similarly with the light of the stars: for, in a moonless night, 
let any of the large stars (such as Venus, or Jupiter at its nearest position [to the 
earth], or also Mars at its nearest position, or Sirius) be opposite a hole giving 
into a dark chamber: its light will appear in the chamber and will be found 
opposite the hole. If the observer places his eye in that light and looks towards 

i 1 6b the hole, he will then see the star facing him. If he observes | the star for some 

time until it has moved through an appreciable distance, its light in the 
chamber will be found to have moved from its [former] place so as to be 
rectilinearly opposite the star. And as the star moves, that light will move, and 
the light and the hole and the star will always be found to lie on a straight line. 

[5] Then if, with the aid of an opaque body, the experimenter tests the light 
from the star that appears at the place opposite the hole in the manner we have 
shown before, by intercepting the straight distance between the place in which 
the light appears and the hole through which the light enters at any point he 
chooses on that distance, the light will appear on the opaque body and will 
vanish from the place in which it [previously] appeared. 

[6] Similarly, if there is a fire facing a hole 1 that leads into a dark chamber, 
the light of that fire will appear in the chamber opposite the hole. And if one 

1 17a tests the straight interval between the light | and the hole in the way we have 

mentioned, the light of the fire will be found to pass through every point on it. 


I- 3 

The light of the fire may also be tested 2 with a straight rod, provided that the 
interval between the fire and the hole is short and the interval between the hole 
and the place where the light appears is also short. For if a straight rod is 
inserted in the hole through which the light has entered and one end is placed 
at the point of visible light, its other end will be found at the fire or in a straight 
. line with it, so that the fire, the hole and the light that appears in the chamber 

after it has entered through the hole will always be found on a straight line. 

[7] This property also becomes manifest from the shadows of all kinds of 
light. For when erect opaque objects are irradiated with light (and) their 
shadows appear on the ground or on the opaque bodies opposite them, these 
shadows are always found to extend rectilinearly, and the shadowed regions 
r ! I7 b are found to be those whose straight distances from the luminous | body (the 
light of which has been cut off from those places) have been intercepted by the 
objects casting the shadows. 

; [8] It thus appears from all that we have said that the lights from self- 

luminous bodies can radiate only in straight lines. 
t [9] We also find that light radiates from every part of every self-luminous 

body. And we find that the light that radiates from the whole luminous body 
is stronger than that which radiates from a part of it. And we find that the light 
that radiates from a larger part is stronger and more manifest than that which 
radiates from a smaller part. With regard to the sun. when it begins to rise 
above the horizon, only a small part of its circumference appears at first, and 
yet the light of that part radiates upon all facing walls and objects and parts of 
the earth’s surface, while at this moment the centre of the sun is hidden below 
the horizon and concealed from anything on the earth’s surface. Then, as the 
! visible part becomes larger, the light grows and becomes stronger, until the 

centre of the sun comes up. The light continues to grow until the whole body 
1 18a of the sun becomes visible. | And similarly when the sun sets: for as long as a 

part of it is visible above the horizon, the light of that part will radiate upon the 
surface of the earth, even though the centre of the sun and the larger part of its 
body are hidden from those places which are irradiated by the light of that 
visible part of the sun. 

[10] Now this fact, I mean that the light radiates from the circumference of 
\ the sun’s body, holds for all horizons. But that part of the sun which is the first 

to appear 1 at one horizon is not the same as the part which is the first to appear 
at another horizon — this being due to the motion proper to the sun. Thus the 
parts of the sun that appear at the beginning of its rising at different horizons 
} are different, especially on different days. And the same holds for the parts of 

the sun that are the last to set. And, in general, for each place on the earth from 
which a part of the sun is visible (whether it is a part of the sun’s circumference 
or not), the light will radiate from that part on that place. It is thus manifest 


1 6 


Optics 


from this consideration that [light] radiates from every part of the body of the 
b sun | upon every body facing that part, even though the centre of the sun and 
the remainder of its bulk may be hidden from that body. 

[11] Further, when the sun is partially and not completely eclipsed and a 
part of it remains visible, light radiates from that visible part upon every place 
on the earth facing it at the time of the eclipse. When the sun is observed at the 
time of an eclipse that covers most of it and includes its centre, the eclipsed part 
will be found to grow larger while the remaining part becomes smaller. And 
yet, from whatever part of the sun that remains, the light will radiate upon the 
surface of the earth, and that part will be visible in every opposite place and 
also in every place opposite any portion of that part. And if the light of the sun 
is examined at the time of eclipse, it will invariably be found to radiate in 
straight lines, just as it did before the eclipse; further, the light of the sun that 
appears on the earth at the time of the eclipse will be found to be weaker than 

a its light before the eclipse. | And as the eclipsed part becomes larger and the 

remaining part smaller, the light visible on the earth becomes weaker. But the 
remaining part of the sun at the time of an eclipse covering most of the sun is 
| but a part of the sun’s circumference. And the condition of the whole 

circumference of the sun is one and the same. Therefore this consideration 
makes it manifest that the light of the sun issues from the whole body of the 
sun and from every place on the sun and not only from a particular place on it. 

[12] It is also manifest from this consideration that the straight lines along 
which the light of the sun extends do not all proceed from the centre of the 
sun. Rather, the light issues from every part of the body of the sun on every 
straight line that can be imagined to extend from that part. For when the 
eclipse covers most of the sun with respect to a particular place on the earth, 
the centre of the sun is at that time hidden from that place. The straight lines 
between the centre of the sun and that place are thus interrupted. But the light 

jb still | radiates upon that place from the rest of the sun. Thus if the light did not 
proceed on lines other than the straight lines extending from the sun’s centre, 
it would not be visible at the time of eclipse in those places of the earth from 
which the centre is hidden. Further, [consider] those places on the earth with 
respect to which the sun has descended from the zenith at the time of eclipse in 
the direction of the exposed, visible part. At this time the light radiates on 
those places from the exposed part of the sun [in a direction inclined] towards 
the side on which the centre of the sun is, and in straight lines that cannot pass 
through that centre. And the light radiates at this time on every place from 
which a part of the body of the sun can be seen and with respect to which the 
eclipse does not cover the whole body of the sun. Therefore, the light of the 
sun does not only radiate in straight lines extending from the centre of the sun, 
but | in all the lines that may rectilinearly extend from every part of it. 


17 


I. 3 

[13] Further, when the sunlight passes through apertures it is always found 
to diverge, and as the light recedes from the aperture it becomes wider. This is 
evident in the case of minute apertures. When sunlight has passed through a 
minute aperture and appears on a place far removed from the aperture, such 
light is found to diverge — the area on which the light appears being many 
times wider than the aperture. As the distance between the aperture and the 
area where the light appears increases, the light becomes wider. And if the 
straight interval between the aperture and the visible light is interrupted by an 
opaque body, the light will be found on that opaque body. But the light on 
that body will be narrower than that which was visible at the former place. 

1 ;ob And as this body approaches the aperture, | the [patch of] light appearing on it 

will become narrower. And as it is moved farther from the aperture the patch 
of light appearing on it will grow wider. Thus it is evident from the widening 
of the light issuing from minute apertures that the light of the sun extends 
from every part of it, and not just from a particular part. 

[14] From this it is also evident that light extends only along straight lines. 
For if the light extended [only] from the centre of the sun or from a particular 
point on it, then the light extending from that point on the lines drawn from it 
to the narrow aperture would insensibly diverge after passing through the 
aperture. For the divergence would be determined by the diameter of the 
aperture, the distance of the sun from the aperture and from the place where 
the light appears. But as far as sense is concerned there is no appreciable 
difference between these two distances by comparison with the distance of the 

i2u sun. Thus the light issuing from the minute aperture and appearing | on the 

ground (or on some other place) would be equal in magnitude to the aperture, 
especially if the aperture is cylindrical. It would also come about that if 
sunlight passed through a narrow cylindrical hole, and the position [of the 
hole] were slightly altered so that the straight line extending through its length 
to the body of the sun would not meet that point on the sun, no light would 
come out of or go through the hole. Further, if light extended on other than 
straight lines, then, having come out of a minute aperture, it would extend on 
non-rectilinear lines. Therefore, the expansion of the light passing through 
minute apertures is clear proof that the light issues from the whole body of the 
sun to the aperture, and that it issues in straight lines. That is why when it 
comes out of the aperture it diverges and widens, this divergence taking place 
in straight lines. For light diverges as it proceeds from the whole body of the 

1 2r b sun to the | narrow aperture, and as it comes out of the aperture and goes 
forward, another cone opposite the first one is produced, since light proceeds 
in straight lines. It thus appears from all that we have explained that the light of 
the sun radiates from every part of the body of the sun to every side directly 
opposite that part. 


Optics 


19 


18 

[15] The case of the moon is more manifest. 1 For the light of the crescent 
moon is visible on the earth’s surface on the second night of the month and on 
following nights. And, especially when the moon faces a dark place, its light 
appears in that place though it is still incomplete and faint. Its light then grows 
every night with the increase of its magnitude until it is full. When this 
happens its light is found to be stronger than on previous nights. Again, the 
case of the full moon at rising and setting is similar to that of the sun, and the 
same is true of the moon at eclipses | when these extend beyond its centre but 
do not cover the whole moon. Also, if the moonlight that has passed through 
tiny holes is tested when the moon is full, it is found to expand, and as it 
recedes from the hole it grows wider. It therefore appears from this expansion 
that moonlight radiates from every part of the moon and not from a particular 
part of it, and that the extension of the light of the moon can take place only in 
straight lines. 

[16] This same property also holds for fire. For when a fire is divided into 
parts by dividing the subject sustaining it, some light will radiate from each of 
these parts, and the light of each part will be found weaker than that of the 
whole fire, and the light of a smaller part will be found weaker than that of a 
larger part. The parts of the fire may also be tested without being divided. To 
make such a test take a fairly wide copper sheet and make a fairly large circular 
hole in it; slide through this hole a well-straightened cylindrical tube | of 
regular circularity and convenient length; let the width of the hole and that of 
the tube be of the same magnitude and let the tube’s aperture not exceed the 
thickness of a needle; insert the tube into the hole in the sheet so that its end 
may be level with the sheet’s surface; attach this sheet to some object at a point 
above the ground, and let it stand vertically on its edge. Now, in the darkness 
of night, bring a flame to the vicinity of this sheet and let it be that of a lamp 
with a broad, bright wick. Hold the flame opposite the hole, then move it 
closer to the hole until it is so near that no measurable distance exists between 
them. The area on the side of the tube will then be shaded by the sheet. Let no 
light be present save the flame being tested, and let this [experiment be carried 
out] in a place unswept by winds. Hold an opaque body opposite the end of 
the tube. The light of the flame will appear on that body. But no light is 
available except that which has passed through the tube; and no light has 
passed through the tube | except the light of that part of the flame opposite the 
tube’s aperture; its area is equal to that of the tube’s aperture. For light 
proceeds only in straight lines, and no uninterrupted straight lines exist 
between the light appearing on the body at the end of the tube and any part of 
the flame other than that opposite the [other] end of the tube. For the straight 
lines between [this part] and the visible light extend inside the tube without the 
interruption of any opaque body. As for the remaining parts of the body of the 


L 3 

flame, light will proceed from them only to the adjacent end of the tube’s 
aperture; so that if any of this light 1 enters the end of the tube it will be 
interrupted by the tube’s wall and abolished and will not pass through the 
length of the tube. In this case, then, only the light of the part opposite the 
tube’s end will pass through the length of the tube’s aperture. 

[17] The experimenter should then gently move the flame so that another 

1 ,>b part of it may face the hole, | and then inspect the body opposite the end of the 

tube on which the light was visible. He will find that the light is still visible on 
that body. If he then moves the body of the flame in all directions, raising and 
lowering it so that the hole may face one part of the flame after another, he will 
find that the light appears in all cases on the body opposite the tube. He will 
also find this light to be weaker than the light of the whole flame when it shows 
on bodies exposed to the whole bulk of the flame at a distance equal to that 
between the flame and the place where the light that has passed through that 
body appears. Let the experimenter narrow the hole by sliding a thin straight 
body into the tube, thus partly obstructing it, and let him fix this body to the 
tube’s interior surface. If he tests the light coming through the rest of the tube, 
he will find it still visible on the body opposite the tube, unless the remaining 
part of the tube is too narrow. He will also find that the light that appears when 
the tube is made narrower is smaller and also less visible and weaker than the 

1 24a former light. | Therefore, it appears from this experiment that light radiates 

from each part of the fire; that the light from a whole fire-brand is stronger 
than that from a part of it; and that the light from a greater part is stronger than 
that from a smaller part. 

[18] Again, let the experimenter fix the flame close to the hole in the sheet so 
that it will not move and so that the same part of it will remain opposite the 
hole; let him then incline the tube so that it will be in an oblique position to the 
surface of the sheet while its end remains attached to the hole; he should plug 
any gap (if such appears) at the end of the tube or at the hole in the sheet at its 
rear; and let him hold the opaque body opposite the tube. He will find that 
light appears on the opaque body. If he alters the position of the tube by 
inclining it to another side, and in front of it holds the opaque body on which 
the light may appear, he will find that the light is still visible on it. By inclining 
the tube in all directions he will find that the light proceeds from that part of 

1 24b the flame to all sides directly opposed to it. If he then moves the flame | so that 

another part of it will be opposite the hole, and tests that part too at those 
inclined positions in which the first part was tested, he will find that the light 
also proceeds from this part to all opposite sides. If he similarly tests every part 
of the flame he will find it to be of this description. It appears from this 
experiment that the light radiates from each part of the flame to every side 
directly opposed to that part. 


20 


21 


Optics 

[19] It is therefore evident from all that we have said that from every part of 
every self-luminous body, light radiates in every straight line extending from 
that part. 

[20] This property being manifest in the case of the larger parts 1 of self- 
luminous bodies, their smaller parts — even when extremely small and as long 
as they preserve their form — must also be luminous; light will radiate from 
these parts in the same manner as it does from the larger ones, even though the 
conditions of smaller parts may be imperceptible. For this property is natural to 

5a | self-luminous bodies and inseparable from their essence. Now small and large 

parts have the same nature as long as they preserve their form. Therefore, the 
property that belongs to their nature must exist in each part (whether small or 
large) provided that that part maintains its nature and form. Now the sun and 
the moon and the [other] heavenly bodies are not made up of congregated 
parts; 2 rather, each is a single continuous body whose nature is one and 
undifferentiated. Nor does one place in them differ in nature from another. 
Similarly, fire is not an aggregate of parts, 2 but a continuous body; each place in 
it is similar in nature to the others, and the nature of its smaller parts is similar to 
| that of its large parts, as long as the small parts preserve the form of fire. 

[21] The following is therefore clear from all that we have made subject to 
inspection and explanation, and from the things which we have shown how to 
test: that the radiation of light from every self-luminous body takes place only 
in straight lines; | that light radiates from every self-luminous body to all 
locations between which and the luminous body there exist straight lines 
which are not interrupted by an opaque body; that light radiates in this manner 
from every part of the self-luminous body; that the light radiating on one place 
from the whole of the luminous body is stronger than that radiating from a 
part of that body upon that place and from that distance; that the light 
radiating from a larger part is stronger than that radiating from a smaller part; 
and that this also applies to the small parts of the luminous body even when 
they cannot be individually examined and their lights are not visible, for this 
would be due to the inability of sense to perceive what is extremely weak. All 
this being so, the light shining from a self-luminous body into the transparent 
air therefore radiates from every part of the luminous body facing that air, 

5a | and the light in the illuminated air is continuous and coherent, and it issues 

from every point on the luminous body in every straight line that can be 
imagined to extend in the air from that point. It is in this manner that lights 
radiate from self-luminous bodies into the homogeneously transparent air. 
Let us call ‘primary lights* those lights that radiate from self-luminous bodies. 

[22] We find, moreover, that the earth is illuminated at the beginning and 
the end of day, before sunrise and after sunset, when none of the illuminated 


L 3 

parts at these times is facing the body of the sun or any part of it. But the cause 
of daylight is none other than the sun, for no light is introduced in day-time 
that did not exist at night other than sunlight. Again, when the sun has risen 
above the earth, we find that dwellings and courtyards shaded from the sun by 
walls or roofs are illuminated although they do not face the sun or any part of 

1 z( )b it. Likewise, the shadows of mountains | and of opaque bodies, indeed all 
shadows, are found to be lit in day-time although they are screened from the 
sun by the opaque bodies of which they are shadows. We also find that many 
dwellings shaded from the sky are lit before sunrise and after sunset although 
the sun is not [yet] visible and these places are screened from the sky. Let us, 
therefore, now inquire into the quality of these lights by subjecting their 
conditions and properties to inspection and experimentation. 

[23] We say, then, that we find that morning light begins when the night is 
not yet over, extending from the eastern horizon towards the middle of the 
sky like a straight column. It is found to be weak and barely visible, and the 
surface of the earth is found to be still in the darkness of night. Then this light 
becomes stronger, increasing in breadth and length and growing in bright- 
ness, while the earth is yet dark. It continues to increase in magnitude and 
brightness, and the surface of the earth facing that light and exposed to it 
becomes illuminated with a faint light that is less than the light visible in the 

1 27a atmosphere at that time. | The light in the atmosphere then gains in strength 

and expands until it fills the eastern horizon and reaches the middle of the sky; 
the atmosphere is then filled with light. Then the light on the ground grows 
stronger, shining and becoming broad daylight, while the sun is still below 
the horizon and invisible. After this stage the sun rises and daylight becomes 
increasingly manifest. And we find that the light at the end of the day behaves 
in a similar way, after the setting sun disappears below the horizon. The 
surface of the earth is lit with a manifest light while the atmosphere is 
illuminated with a strong light, after which the light of the atmosphere 
continues to weaken and the light on the earth’s surface lessens until night 
falls. 

[24] Furthermore, we find that when sunlight irradiates a wall facing a dark 
place nearby, the latter is turned from darkness to brightness. And ifleading to 
that dark place there is a door facing another wall, then this wall [will be 
illuminated by] the sunlight radiating on the outside wall. Those parts of the 

127b chamber’s floor facing the door and the sunlight | will be more strongly 
illuminated than the rest of the chamber. When the sun goes down, its light no 
longer radiating on that wall, the place returns to darkness. Similarly, we find 
that when daylight or moonlight or the light of fire irradiates the wall, a.dark 
place in front of it will be illuminated by that light; when that light ceases the 
place returns to darkness. Also if, opposite any place illuminated by a strong 


22 Optics 

light of any kind, there is an adjacent dark place with an opening between 
them, we find the dark place illuminated by the light opposite to it. 

[25] This state of affairs can be tested at all times. If an experimenter wishes 
to do so let him employ a dark chamber with a door facing an adjacent wall on 
which sunlight may shine. The chamber door should not be exposed to the 
sky. Thus the light should reach the facing wall through an opening or door at 
the top of the wall of the dark chamber, assuming this wall to be higher than 
the chamber’s roof. The space between the two walls, namely the wall with 

1 ;Sa the chamber door and the wall facing it should be roofed above the opening [ 

or shaded by an opaque body. And let [the back of] the chamber face east. The 
experimenter should observe the place when morning light shines on that wall 
through the opening opposite, which should be fairly wide. He will find the 
chamber illuminated by that light, and the light in the chamber weaker than 
the light on that wall. Then, as the light on the wall grows stronger, so will the 
light in the chamber. And when the sun’s light radiates on the wall the light in 
the chamber will gain in intensity and strength. Further, that place inside the 
chamber facing both the door and the irradiated wall will be found more 
intensely illuminated than the rest of the chamber. Then when the sun moves 
away from that wall the light in the chamber will weaken. 

[26] Suppose now that inside the chamber there is another dark chamber 
whose door is exposed to the wall facing the first door. When the light shines 
upon the outside wall, and consequently appears on the wall inside the [first] 
chamber opposite the door, then, assuming this light to be strong and the door 

1 28b of the second chamber open and exposed to this wall, | this second chamber 

will also be illuminated by the light of this wall, especially if the irradiated 
outside wall is pure white. And those parts of the second chamber that face this 
wall and are close to it will be found to be more intensely lit than the rest of the 
chamber. And if the illuminated wall inside the first chamber is white, the 
light appearing in the second chamber will be more manifest. Similarly, if 
moonlight and daylight are tested in this manner, the dark place will be found 
to be illuminated by them if it faces them. 

[27] It is therefore shown by this experiment that from the light that shines 
on any body, light radiates in every opposite direction. This being the case, 
the light that appears on the surface of the earth at the beginning of day before 
sunrise and at the end of day after sunset is but a light that comes to it from the 
light that is manifest in the opposite atmosphere. The atmosphere is lit before 

1 29a sunrise by sunlight | because it is facing the sun and the sun is not at this time 
hidden from it but only from the surface of the earth. And this light extends in 
straight lines from the body of the sun into the illuminated atmosphere. Then 
from the atmosphere illuminated by sunlight there also radiates, again in 
straight lines, some light on those places facing it on the earth’s surface. And as 


I. 3 2 3 

long as [the light] is scanty and weak, what radiates of it on the earth is not 
apparent, but as it gains in strength and intensity, the light radiating upon the 
earth becomes stronger and visible. 

[28] And so it is with evening light. After sunset, the part [of the 
atmosphere] facing the sun is illuminated with its light — this light extending 
in straight lines. From the illuminated atmosphere light radiates on those 
places facing it on the earth’s surface. And as long as the light in the 
atmosphere is strong the earth will be lit with a visible light, but when it 
weakens the light on the earth’s surface weakens and the earth’s surface 
becomes dark. It is similarly the case with the lights [found] in dwellings and 

1 29b walled courtyards shaded from the sun | and with all shadows illuminated in 

day-time before and after sunrise and after sunset and during the rest of the 
day: these lights reach them only from the luminous atmosphere facing them 
and also from the illuminated walls and nearby surface of the earth illuminated 
by daylight. Such, then, is the case with day[light] and the lights in places that 
are lit at night by moonlight when they are concealed from the moon, and also 
the case with the light ot fire. 

[29] This property, I mean the radiation of lights from accidental lights in 
straight lines, can be examined by an accurate experiment that leads to 
certainty. Morning light can be examined as I shall describe. The experi- 
menter should make use of a chamber inside which there is another chamber; 
let them be situated between east and west, and let no light enter them except 
through the door. Let the eastern wall in the eastern chamber be exposed, and 
a hole be pierced at the top of this wall similar to those made in the walls of 
chambers to let in the light. Let the hole be circular with a diameter not less 

1 30a than | a foot. Let it take the shape of a cone, wider inside than outside. This 

hole then faces the eastern side of the sky. In the opposite wall common to 
both chambers let the experimenter pierce two holes facing the first hole. 
These two holes then lead to the western chamber. Let them be nearer to the 
ground than the first hole so that an observer looking into either of them will 
see the sky through the first, higher hole. Let each of the two holes be equal 
and similar to the first. It should be ensured that the extension of each of these 
two holes through the thickness of the wall should be along the straight lines 
imagined to proceed from the outer end of the first hole to the facing end of the 
second hole. This can be assured by making the wall so thick as to allow the 
holes a fairly deep extension in its body, so that the light coming out of these 
holes will not diverge too much. The extension of each of these holes in the 

1 30b body of the wall should be | of equal width and not conical [in shape]. 

[30] Now stretch a thread from the first, higher hole to one ofthe two holes, 
and make sure that the thread passes through a point on the outer end of the 


3 



24 


Optics 


25 


higher hole and the corresponding point on the outer end of the facing hole. 
Pass the thread through the [first] hole and nail down its end outside [this] 
higher hole. The experimenter should now enter the western chamber and 
extend the thread to a point on the ground or on a wall of the chamber. He 
should subsequently stretch the thread so tightly as to make it exactly straight 
and in place. This done, he should mark the position of its extremity in the 
chamber. This place, then, will be in a straight line with the straight interval 
extending from the first, higher hole to the lower hole facing it. The thread 
should now be taken out of this hole and put through the other hole, and the 
same things should be done with it as before. Stretch it to another place in the 
chamber and mark the position of its extremity. This second position is 
therefore in a straight line with the straight interval also extending from the 
higher hole to the second hole. 

| [31] When these two positions in the chamber have been determined, let 
the experimenter choose a pitch dark but clear night. After nightfall let him 
enter the chamber and close the door, thus excluding all light from the 
chambers. Both chambers 1 will then be dark. Let him then enter the western 
chamber and look 2 into one of the two holes so as to see the sky through the 
higher hole. He should make sure that none of the large stars whose light may 
be seen on the earth’s surface is facing the hole. If such a star is there he should 
wait until it no longer faces the hole. He should also look into the other hole so 
as to see the sky through the higher hole when there is no large star facing it. 
He will see the atmosphere from these positions to be dark. Let him then 
inspect the places he has determined in the chamber opposite the holes. He will 
find them dark. No light will be visible in them, and the whole chamber will 
be dark, except for some extremely weak and negligible light from the sky. 

[32] He should then wait | until morning. When dawn breaks he should 
look through the opposing holes until he sees the atmosphere illuminated and, 
moving from his position so as not to be in front of the hole, look at each one 
of the places he has determined opposite the holes. He will find them 
illuminated with a faint light proportionate to the strength of the light in the 
atmosphere. If no light is visible in the chamber he should wait a while until 
morning light grows stronger and then look at those places: he will find them 
illuminated, and the light in each of them will be circular and wider than the 
hole to the extent required by the expansion of the light. But he will find no 
light in the rest of the chamber at this time. Whatever light he may find will be 
weak and perceptible only in proportion to what may be emanating from the 
light visible in the two spots opposite the holes. Then when he screens one of 
the two holes, the light will depart from the place facing it, though the light 
from the other will remain. When he removes the screen the light will return 
to that place. 


I- 3 

i , [33] Let the experimenter then turn to the straight interval | between one of 

the two holes and the place to which the light proceeds from that hole, and 
interrupt it with an opaque body. He will find that the light will appear on the 
opaque body and disappear from the place opposite that hole. If he then moves 
this body along the straight interval, he will find the light to be always on it. 
(This interval can be determined 1 with the help of a straight rod or a long ruler 
by attaching the ruler to the circumference of the hole and thus determine the 
straightness of the interval with it.) If he then removes the opaque screening 
body, the light will return to its former place. Similarly, if, in the first 
chamber, he interrupts the straight interval between the first, higher hole and 
one of the two holes, he will find that the light will appear on the body 
interrupting that interval and disappear from the second chamber; and upon 
removing the screen the light will return to its place. Again, if he examines in 
both chambers the light [passing] through the other hole 2 he will find it to be 
of this description. Now if he makes several holes in the second wall, making 

1 32b sure that each of them directly faces | the first hole (as described in the case of 

the two former holes) he will find in the second chamber separate lights equal 
in number to those holes, each of them being directly opposite the first, higher 
hole. 

[34] Thus it is clearly proved by this experiment that some light proceeds 
from the atmosphere illuminated by the morning light to opposite places; that 
it so proceeds in straight lines; and that the daylight radiating upon the earth 
before sunrise and after sunset is but a light radiating upon it from the 
atmosphere illuminated by the sunlight opposite the earth s surface. If the 
experimenter also examines in the same manner the luminous atmosphere 
during the rest of the day, he will find that the light radiates from it in straight 
lines. 

[35] But if some light emanates from the illuminated air to the opposite 
places, then from every part of the air that is illuminated by any light whatever 
some light emanates in all directions; and the light emanating from the air will 
be weaker than that existing in the air; and the strength of the light emanating 

1 33a from the air | will be proportionate to the light existing in it and to the 
magnitude of that illuminated part of the air. Furthermore, the air inside the 
second and first chambers is continuous through the first hole with the outer 
illuminated air from which the light has entered into the second chamber. 
Now between the illuminated air and the air in the second chamber there exist 
many curved and sinuous intervals passing through the holes and uninterrup- 
ted by any opaque bodies. Thus if one of the two holes is stopped so that the 
light opposite this stopped hole disappears, then between, on the one hand, 
the place where the light has vanished and, on the other, the first hole and the 
outside air, air will continuously extend in many non-rectilinear lines through 


26 


Optics 


27 


the other hole which has not been stopped. If, therefore, light proceeded on 
other than straight lines, and if it expanded from the illuminated air into the 
whole of the air that is continuous with it in other than straight lines, then the 

133b whole of the | farther chamber would be uniformly lit when the atmosphere is 

shining with morning light. For the air in [this chamber] is continuous with 
the illuminated atmosphere at the time when the light enters the chamber 
through the holes and also when one of the two holes is stopped. But during 
the experiment there is no light in the farther chamber other than the lights 
facing the holes each of which lies in a straight line with the illuminated 
outside air through the two opposing holes facing it in the two walls of the 
two chambers, or [the light] in the interval rectilinearly extending between the 
hole and the illuminated place through the two opposing holes, or whatever 
radiates from this light into the rest of the chamber. 

[36] [The following] shows that the little light that shines in the rest of the 
chamber is emanating only from the light opposite the hole inside the 
chamber, and from nothing else. If one of the two holes is stopped, and the 
rectilinear interval between the remaining hole and the light passing through it 
is interrupted with an opaque body, and this body is then brought near the 

i 3 -p hole so as to make | the light vanish at the place where it showed, the little light 

that radiated from this light and showed in the rest of the chamber will 
disappear. This operation, however, does not interrupt the continuity of the 
air inside the whole of the chamber with the luminous air outside, provided 
that that opaque body interrupting the rectilinear interval has not touched the 
hole. 

[37] It is evident from this experiment that the light does not proceed from 
the illuminated air on other than straight lines; and that light rectilinearly 
radiates from every part of the illuminated air in all opposite directions 
— because all the separate lights that appear inside the farther chamber face 
different parts of the illuminated air outside, and also because the similarly 
illuminated parts of the air are of the same condition. 

[38] It is in this manner, therefore, that daylight can be examined and 
shown to arise from the light of the illuminated atmosphere and to proceed 
from the atmosphere in straight lines. 

[ 34b [39] One might object to this assertion, saying: | the whole atmosphere 

faces the body of the sun at all times and throughout the night; only the earth’s 
shadow, a narrow cone which constitutes only a small portion of the whole 
atmosphere is hidden from the body of the sun. Now what appears of the 
atmosphere facing the earth’s surface at all times is half the whole atmosphere, 
while the part concealed from the sun at night is a small portion of this half, 
and most of the air that appears throughout the night facing the earth’s surface 


I. 3 

is illuminated by sunlight. Therefore, if the light that shows in the atmosphere 
in the morning and evening and that radiates upon the earth’s surface were [the 
light of] the air 1 that faces the sun and is illuminated by sunlight, then the light 
would appear in the atmosphere and radiate on the earth’s surface throughout 
the night, since the larger part of the air facing the earth’s surface is illuminated 
throughout the night. But no light appears throughout the night in the 
atmosphere or on the earth’s surface. Therefore, the light that appears in the 

i atmosphere | and on the earth’s surface in the morning and evening is not the 

light of the air that faces the sun and is illuminated by sunlight. 

[40] In reply to this objection we say: the whole atmosphere is illuminated 
by sunlight at all times; no part of it is dark or concealed from the sun except 
the conic umbra which is the earth’s shadow. However, the light emanating 
from the illuminated atmosphere is weak, and the farther it extends the 
weaker it becomes, this being a characteristic property of light. Thus some 
light always radiates in all directions from the sunlit atmosphere and pene- 
trates into the atmosphere that is shaded by the earth’s shadow. But this light 
weakens as it recedes from the sunlit atmosphere from which it proceeds. That 
being so, the part of the earth’s shadow that is contiguous to the illuminated 
atmosphere and the part near that, viz. the borders of the shadow, 1 are such 
that the light radiating on them from the adjacent illuminated atmosphere is 
fairly strong. But when this light recedes from the borders of the shadow and 

1 35b reaches the middle, or near the middle, of the shadow, | it becomes very weak. 

[41] Now throughout the night the sun is at a distance from the horizon’s 
circumference, and during most of the night the place on the face of the earth 
where night falls is situated at or near the middle of the earth’s shadow. 1 Then, 
when the sun approaches the horizon, the conical shadow will be oblique, and 
the circumference of the shadow’s base surrounding the earth will approach 
the place whose horizon-circumference the sun has approached. Thus the 
place whose horizon-circumference the sun has approached will not be at the 
limit of the shadow 2 or near the shadow’s border, and the light that issues 
from the sun and extends alongside the edge of the shadow and close to it will 
be near the face of the earth. And when the border and limit of the shadow and 
the light that extends alongside the edge of the shadow and close to the 
shadow’s border approach [that place on] the face of the earth, the illuminated 
atmosphere will be near [that place on] the face of the earth, and the light 
reaching [that place on] the earth’s surface from this atmosphere will be fairly 
strong. It is for this reason that the eye will perceive the light in the atmosphere 
at the approach of morning, and this light will reach the earth in the morning. 
Then, as the sun approaches the horizon, the shadow’s border will approach 

[ 3ba | the face of the earth, the illuminated atmosphere will approach the eye, and 

the light reaching the face of the earth will grow stronger. Consequently, as 


28 


Optics 


29 


the sun approaches the horizon, the light showing on the face of the earth will 
gain in strength and clarity until the circumference of the sun’s body reaches 
the circumference of the horizon, so that the border and limit of the shadow 
and the air illuminated at this time by daylight become close to [that place on] 
the earth’s surface. Now the air that is adjacent and near to [that place on] the 
earth’s surface and that is illuminated by daylight when the sun is close to the 
horizon before it rises is part of the cone of the earth’s shadow; and this air is 
illuminated only because it is near the illuminated atmosphere facing the sun, 
since every place whose horizon lies above the sun and which does not face the 
sun must be inside the cone constituted by the shadow. But this illuminated air 
is the shadow’s border adjoining the illuminated atmosphere that faces the 
sun. 

[42] Thus the reason why the light does not appear in the atmosphere 
throughout the night is the remoteness of the illuminated air facing the sun 
from the face of the earth, and the weakness of the light emanating from the 
light in this illuminated air, | and the failure of its strength to reach the middle 
of the earth’s shadow. And the reason why the light appears in the atmosphere 
at dawn and at the beginning of night, and why it irradiates the surface of the 
earth in the morning and evening, is the nearness to the eye of the illuminated 
atmosphere facing the sun and the nearness of the shadow’s border to the 
surface of the earth at these times. And for this reason, I mean this nearness, 
that which first appears of dawn looks narrow and elongated, for the nearest of 
the shadow’s borders to the eye at this time is one straight line, namely the 
straight line extending on the surface of the shadow’s cone passing through 
the nearest point to the eye at this time on the circumference of the shadow’s 
base. For the eye is not at this moment at the middle of the shadow’s cone but 
displaced from it to that side of the circumference of the shadow’s base 
towards the sun. For the point, towards the sun, which is the extremity of the 
diameter of the shadow’s base passing at this moment through the eye, is 
nearer to the eye than all the points on the circumference of the shadow’s base. | 
(By the shadow’s base I mean here the plane that passes through the position of 
the eye and intersects the shadow’s cone, the line proceeding from this point 
and extending on the surface of the shadow’s cone being in this case the nearest 
line on this surface to the eye.) The reason is thus evident why light appears in 
the atmosphere and on the earth’s surface in the morning and in the evening 
but not throughout the night. 

[43] Finally, the following might be said: If the light seen in the atmosphere in 
the morning and in the evening were inherent in the atmosphere but perceived 
at those times merely on account of its nearness to the eye, then sight would 
perceive the light in the atmosphere between walls and inside chambers 
throughout the day, since that atmosphere is illuminated throughout the day 


I. 3 

and is near the eye. But sight does not perceive the light in such atmosphere; 
rather, it perceives the light on chamber walls without perceiving any light in 
the atmosphere between these walls. Therefore, the light seen in the atmos- 

! ; . b phere in the morning and | in the evening is not a light that is inherent in the air. 

[44] In reply to this statement we say: Air is a very transparent body. It is, 
however, not only extremely transparent but has a little density in it. 
Therefore, when sunlight irradiates the air, it traverses the air in accordance 
with the air’s transparency, and a small amount of the light is fixed in it ii. 
accordance with its slight density. Thus the light that is fixed in a small volume 
of air is very little because the volume of air is small and because air is very 
transparent and [only] a little dense and because the quality of the light that is 
fixed in it is weak. Plenty of light exists, however, in an atmosphere of great 
depth because of the large volume of air, even though the quality of the light in 
every small part of it may be weak. But the air existing between walls and 
inside chambers is small in volume. Therefore, the light in it is scanty on two 
accounts: the smallness of its volume and the weakness of its quality. 

1 38a [45] Now the extent of the illuminated atmosphere perceived, | and 

through which the sight extends at the time of its perceiving the morning or 
evening light, is of a great depth in the direction opposite the eye. And at this 
time the whole atmosphere extending through this depth is illuminated. And 
every little part of the atmosphere in this depth has a little weak light. And the 
sizable illuminated portion of this atmosphere opposite the eye at the time of 
the sight’s perception of the light in it, i.e. those parts of which each is equal to 
the magnitude of the inter-mural air where the light does not show and which 
extend in depth along the straight line opposite the eye, are, if estimated by 
our imagination, excessively numerous, on account of the great volume and 
depth of this air. 

[46] But if these parts are excessively numerous, and if a little light exists in 
each of them, and if these many parts rectilinearly extend opposite the eye, 
then the individually small lights will be multiplied and their strength will be 

1 38b multiplied very many times, for | the eye will perceive them all through one 
line. But when a small light multiplies many times, it grows in strength and 
becomes manifest to the sense. That is why light is visible in the illuminated 
atmosphere, but not in the small [volume] of air inside chambers and between 
walls or in valleys between mountains 1 or in the air intervening between the 
eye and the earth’s surface, or in any small volume of air. 

[47] The difficulty has therefore been clarified, and it has been shown to be 
true that the light perceived by sight in the atmosphere in the morning and in 
the evening is the light of the sunlit air facing the sun, and that the. light 
irradiating the surface of the earth before sunrise and after sunset proceeds 
from the light that exists in-the sunlit air facing the sun. 


30 


Optics 


3i 


[48] As for the accidental lights that appear on opaque bodies, the lights 
radiating from them on the bodies that confront them may also be subjected to 
an accurate experiment in the following way. Let the experimenter employ a 
pure white wall which can be exposed to daylight and to sunlight and 

1 39a moonlight; | and opposite, near and parallel to this wall let another wall stand. 

And behind each of the walls let there be a chamber into which the light may 
enter only through a door. Let the experimenter then take a block of wood not 
less than one cubit in length, breadth and depth. Let him smooth its surfaces, 
making them as plane and parallel as possible, and let its edges be straight and 
parallel. He should then draw, in the middle of two facing surfaces, two 
straight and parallel lines, each parallel to two edges of the surface in which it is 
drawn. Then, from the ends of each one of these lines, let him cut off two 
equal segments, neither of them more than the breadth of two digits. Two 
points are thus marked on each of the two lines. 

[49] About the two points on one of the lines let him draw two equal circles, 
each with a diameter equal to the breadth ofone digit ofa fair size. Then, about 

j 1 39b one of the two points on the other line, he should draw a circle equal | to each 

of the two former circles, then divide the line between the centre of the circle 
and the other point assumed on this line into two parts — such that the ratio of 
the smaller part to the greater is as the ratio of the thickness of the wooden 
block to the interval between the two walls. (He may determine this interval 
with the help of a straight rod, making sure that it lies perpendicularly to both 
walls.) The line having been divided in that ratio, let the greater part 
corresponding to the interval between the walls lie next to the circle drawn on 
this line. When this division has been properly made, there should be drawn 
about the dividing point a circle equal to each of the previous circles. Then, 
componendo , the ratio of the line between the centres of the two far circles on 
the first, undivided line, to the line between the centres of the near circles on 
the divided line, will be as the ratio of the thickness of the wooden block plus 
the interval between the walls, to this interval itself. 

1 40a | [50] The experimenter should bore two holes in the wooden block. One of 

these should be from the outermost of the two near circles to the outermost 
and opposite circle of the two circles on the other surface. Let the hole be 
circular and cylindrical, and let its circumference coincide with that of the two 
facing circles. This hole, then, will be at right angles to the two parallel 
surfaces. Let the other hole extend from the circle at the dividing point on the 
line to the other, similarly outermost circle of the two far circles 1 in the other 
surface. And let the circumference of the hole coincide with that of the two 
circles. This hole will then be inclined to the two parallel surfaces. 

[51] When these holes have been properly made, let him make in the wall 
opposite the white wall a square hole as wide as the wooden block. Let him 


I. 3 

mount the block in this hole with the surface having the two near circles facing 
outwards. He should make sure, while mounting the wooden block, that its 

1 4 ob surface parallels that of the white wall. | Further, the distance of its surface 
from the white wall should be exactly equal to the inter-mural interval 
according to which the line has been divided. When the wooden block has 
been precisely positioned, he should plug any gaps that may be left round it, 
and firmly fix it in place. If the thickness of the wall exceeds that of the block he 
should obliquely 1 remove the excess from within the chamber so as to give the 
remainder of the hole a conical shape. But it would be better to make the 
thickness of the block equal to that of the wall from the outset. 

[52] When the wooden block has been perfectly mounted, let the experi- 
menter take a perfectly straight rod equal in thickness to [the width of] the 
hole in the block. Better still, he should obtain a straight rod thicker than the 
width of the hole, and then turn it in a lathe 1 to make it exactly and uniformly 
equal in thickness to the hole’s width. Having properly prepared this rod, let 

1 41a him sharpen one end of it | into the shape of a cone with the point of its vertex 

appearing as the extremity of the axis of the rod. He should then insert the rod 
into the perpendicular hole and move it along the hole until the sharpened end 
meets the surface of the white wall. When this happens let him mark the point 
of contact. This point will then be on a straight line with the axis of the 
perpendicular hole. This done, let him take the rod out of the hole. 

[53] The experimenter should now enter the chamber into which this hole 
gives, place one eye at the circumference of the perpendicular hole, and look at 
the white wall, searching for the limit of what he can perceive of that wall, and 
for the farthest perceptible place from the point assumed on the wall to be in a 
straight line with the axis of the perpendicular hole. He should instruct 
someone to mark this place with a point. The experimenter should then turn 
his eye round the circumference of the hole, looking from every side of it at the 

1 41b wall, and searching for the farthest perceptible place | on the wall from the 

assumed point. He will find that the farthest perceptible distances from the 
assumed point opposite the centre of the hole are always equal — for this is a 
[characteristic] property of round holes. 

[54] With the first point on the white wall as centre and with a radius equal 
to the farthest distance that his eye has perceived on the wall, let the 
experimenter draw a circle. 

[55] Then, again placing his eye at the hole’s circumference and looking 
towards the drawn circle, he will perceive the circle’s circumference and 
nothing beyond it. Let him move his eye round the hole’s circumference; if he 
sees nothing outside it, then the circle will have been properly placed. If, 
however, his eye perceives something outside the circumference, or if he fails 
to perceive the circumference from some or all positions, then the circle will 


32 


Optics 


not have been properly placed. If the latter is the case, he should alter the circle 
and examine it with his eye until it is precisely placed — that is, until he finds 
that by moving his eye round the hole’s circumference he will see the 
circumference of the circle and nothing beyond it. 

2a [56] When this circle has been precisely placed, | let him turn to the inclined 

hole and, placing his eye at its circumference, look at the white wall. He will 
perceive the circle drawn on this wall and its circumference and nothing more. 
Further, if he moves his eye round the circumference of the inclined hole, 
while looking at the farthest perceptible point on the wall, he will perceive the 
circle and its circumference and nothing more, or less. 

[57] For the ratio of the line between the centres of the two far circles on the 
interior surface of the wooden block 

to the line between the centres of the two opposite circles on the 
exterior surface, 

is as the ratio of the line extending along the axis of the perpendicular 
hole between the centre of the interior circle and the surface of the white wall 
to the part of this line between the two walls. 

[58] Then, the axis of the inclined hole, if produced, will meet the axis of the 
perpendicular hole at the same point in which the latter axis meets the surface 
of the white wall. 

2b [59] But the centre of the circle | drawn on the white wall is the point at 

which the axis of the perpendicular hole meets the surface of the white wall. 

[60] Therefore, the axis of the inclined hole, if produced, will meet the 
surface of that wall at the centre of the circle drawn on it. 

[61] This being so, 

the ratio of the line between the centre of the circle drawn on the 
surface of the wall and the middle of the axis of the inclined hole 
to the remaining half of this axis, 

is as the ratio of the line between the centre of the said circle and the 
middle of the axis of the perpendicular hole 

to the remaining half of this axis — for the line joining the mid-points 
of the two axes is parallel to the line joining the centres of the two circles. 

[62] And this ratio is the ratio of the radius of the circle drawn on the wall to 
the radius of the circle of the perpendicular hole inside the chamber — for 

the circumference of the circle drawn on the wall is visible from the 
circumference of this hole; 

and nothing can be perceived by the eye except along straight lines; 
and, therefore, the eye will perceive the circumference of the circle 

3a on the wall along the straight lines | passing through the diagonally opposed 

points 1 on the circumferences of the two circles of the hole and ending at the 
circumference of the circle on the wall; 


33 


l* 3 

again, the eye perceives the circumference of the circle on the wall from 
all points on the circumference of the circle of the perpendicular hole; 

therefore, all the straight lines passing through the circumferences of the 
two circles belonging to the perpendicular hole and through the circum- 
ference of the circle on the wall will intersect at the middle of the axis of this 
hole — 

since the two circles belonging to the hole are equal and since the diagonal 
lines intersect at the middle of the hole’s axis. 

[63] Consequently, 

the ratio of the line between the centre of this drawn circle on 
the wall and the middle of the axis of the perpendicular hole 
to half this axis, 

is as the ratio of the radius of the circle on the wall 
to the radius of the interior circle of the hole. 

[64] But the ratio of the line between the centre of the circle drawn on the 
wall and the middle of the axis of the perpendicular hole 

to half this axis, 

is as the ratio of the line between the centre of the circle on the wall 
and the middle of the axis of the inclined hole 
to half this axis. 

[65] Therefore, 

1 43b the ratio of the line between the centre | of the circle on the wall and 

the middle of the axis of the inclined hole 
to half this axis, 

is as the ratio of the radius of the circle drawn on the wall 
to the radius of the interior circle of the inclined hole — 

since the circle belonging to the inclined hole is equal to that which 
belongs to the perpendicular hole. 

[66] This being the case, the most that can appear to the eye on the surface of 
the wall, while the eye is at the circumference of the inclined hole, is the 
circumference of the circle drawn on that wall opposite the perpendicular 
hole. 

[67] If the experimenter, when his eye is at the circumference of the inclined 
hole, perceives something of the wall outside the circle, this will be either 
because the surface of the wooden block is not parallel to the wall’s surface, or 
because the distance between the block and the wall is not the same as that 
according to which the line on the surface of the block has been divided. If that 
is the case he should adjust the position of the wooden block and look through 
the perpendicular and the inclined hole, until the block is properly placed and 
all he sees through both holes is nothing more or less than the circle drawn on 

1 44a the wall’s surface. For if the wooden block has been precisely placed, | the eye 


34 


35 


Optics 

will not be able to perceive through the holes anything more or less than the 
same circle on the wall. 

[68] When the wooden block has been precisely placed and perfectly and 
securely mounted in its hole, the experimenter should bore a round hole in the 
white wall through the same circle drawn on it so as to lead into the chamber 
behind this wall. Let the circumference of the hole be the same as that of the 
circle drawn on the wall’s surface, and let the hole extend in the shape of a cone 
into the body of the wall, becoming wider as it goes deeper inside. Having 
made this hole, the experimenter should cover it with an opaque, pure white 
body, such as a white cloth or stone or sheet of paper. Let this body be not 
smooth; let it cover the entire hole and let its surface be level with the wall’s 
surface. 

[69] The experimenter should then watch for the morning light. When 
daylight shines and the light on the exposed white wall becomes strong, but 
before the wall is irradiated by sunlight, let him enter the chamber having the 
two holes, close the door and draw over it a thick curtain so that no light will 

nb enter through the door or through gaps in it. | He should then cover the 
inclined hole so that no light will remain in the chamber other than that which 
enters through the perpendicular hole. Then, opposite this hole, let him hold 
an opaque, pure white object. He will find some light on it according to the 
strength of the light that is on the white wall and on the white body covering 
the hole. He will also find that the visible light on the opaque object is circular 
and that it diverges in the same way as the essential light issuing from 
self-luminous bodies 1 and passing through cylindrical holes. 

[70] If, from a point in this light that appears inside the chamber on the 
opaque object, the experimenter looks towards the white wall, he will see 
only the white body covering the hole in that wall. When this light has become 
manifest to the experimenter, let him remove the white body covering the 
hole and close the door of the chamber into which this hole leads. Then the 
light which appeared inside the chamber on the opaque object, and which 
entered through the perpendicular hole, will vanish and nothing of it will be 

is* visible. If any light should appear on this object, | this will be according to 

what may be emanating from the light that reaches the interior of the 
perpendicular hole. 

[71] If any light appears in this case on the opaque object inside the chamber 
with the two holes, the experimenter should paint black the interior surface of 
the perpendicular hole 1 (by means of which he is examining the light) so that no 
visible light will emanate from it to the interior of the chamber next to it. This 
having been done, no light will appear on the opaque object confronting the 
perpendicular hole if the white body that covered the opposite hole is removed. 


I- 3 

[72] When the light that appeared on the opaque object facing the perpen- 
dicular hole disappears upon the removal of the illuminated body covering the 
opposite hole, the experimenter should replace this white body, thus covering 
again the hole in the wall. Then the light will again appear on the opaque 
object inside the chamber, as it did in the former case. 

145b [73] It is therefore clear from this experiment | that the light that passes 

through the perpendicular hole and appears on the opaque object reaches the 
latter only from the accidental light on the opposite white body that covered 
the opposite hole. 

[74] Now at the time when this body is removed, and the opposite hole 
open, and no light appears on the opaque object inside the chamber, there exist 
through the continuous air many curved and sinuous intervals uninterrupted 
by any opaque bodies, [all of which lie] between, on the one hand, the opaque 
body inside the chamber — from which the light has disappeared — and, on 
the other, the rest of the white wall which is wholly exposed to the light and 
many [other] illuminated walls and the whole illuminated atmosphere. Only 
the place directly opposite the perpendicular hole has changed. Nevertheless, 
the light will fail to appear inside the chamber while the hole in the wall 
remains open and there is no illuminated opaque body directly facing the 
perpendicular hole. If the white body is replaced so as to cover the outside 

1 46a hole, the light will appear on the object | inside the chamber. 

[75] Now let the experimenter turn to the straight interval between the 
perpendicular hole and the hole in the wall, and interrupt it with an opaque, 

> pure white body at any point he chooses outside the hole: if light radiates on 

this body, then it will appear on the object inside the chamber. Then let the 
experimenter turn to the straight interval between the extremity of the 
i perpendicular hole inside the chamber and the object on which the light 

! appears, and interrupt this interval with an opaque object at any point he 

chooses: the light will vanish from the first object and appear on the second. 

[76] Therefore, from considering the appearance of the light on the opaque 

j object inside the chamber while the body that shines with the accidental light 

| is fixed at the wall-opening, and the disappearance of the light from this 

opaque object upon removing the illuminated body at the opening, it is 
manifest that the light that appears inside the chamber on the opaque object 
facing the perpendicular hole while the illuminated body is fixed at the 

1 46b opposite opening, | reaches the opaque object only from the accidental light in 

the illuminated body that is fixed at the opening, and that in this case no other 
light reaches it. 

[77] That light emanates from the accidental light only in straight lines is 
again manifest from considering the following: that the light appears on the 
opaque object inside the chamber when the illuminated body is directly facing 


37 


36 Optics 

it, being either at the opening in the wall or at any point on the straight interval 
between the two holes outside the chamber; that the light on the opaque object 
inside the chamber disappears upon the opposite illuminated body being 
removed, though the light remains on the rest of the wall and in the whole air 
which is illuminated by daylight and which is continuous with the air in the 
hole, and on many [other] illuminated walls between which and the perpen- 
dicular hole there exists a continuum of air. 

[78] For, between, on the one hand, the opaque object on which the light 
shows inside the chamber, and, on the other, the rest of the white wall 
illuminated by daylight and many [other] illuminated walls | and the air 
illuminated by daylight, there exist infinitely many distances, curved and 
sinuous and arc-shaped, which are continuous between these places and the 
opaque object inside the chamber, and extend through the intervening 
continuous air. And, upon removing the illuminated white body opposite the 
hole, there disappears only the light at the extremities of the straight intervals 
between the object inside the chamber and the light. 

[ 79 ] Furthermore, if the experimenter observes the light that appears on the 
opaque object inside the chamber while the object faces the illuminated white 
body, he will find it weaker than the accidental light on the opposing body 
outside. Then if he moves this opaque object away from the hole along the line 
of opposition he will find that the light visible on it weakens, and as the object 
recedes from the hole this light weakens progressively. 

[80] Having tried all these things, the experimenter should now plug the 

perpendicular hole, open the inclined hole, blacken | its interior surface, 1 and 
confront it with the opaque object. He should also cover the opening in the U9* 

white wall with the white body. He will find that the light appears on the 

opaque object inside the chamber. \ 

[81] Again, if he interrupts the straight interval between the opening in the j 

wall and the inclined hole with the white body at any point he chooses on this ; 

distance, while this white body is irradiated by light, he will find the light 

visible on the opaque object inside the chamber. Then if he removes the 
illuminated white body facing the inclined hole outside, the light will vanish 
from the opaque object; no light will be visible on it. Upon the white body 
being returned to the opposite opening or to the straight interval between it 
and the inclined hole, the light will again be visible on the opaque object inside 
the chamber — as was the case with the perpendicular hole. It is therefore 
evident from this experiment that the light which appears inside the chamber 
on the opaque object facing the inclined hole | reaches that object only in a 
straight line and only from the opposing [white] body. 

[82] If the experimenter, while still examining the inclined hole, moves the 
opaque object inside the chamber away from the hole, he will find that the 


I- 3 

light appearing on that object weakens. And as the object is moved farther 
from the hole the light appearing on it becomes weaker. 

[83] The experimenter should then open both the perpendicular and the 
inclined holes at the same time and confront each of them with a white, 
opaque object — having covered the opening in the wall with the [other] 
white body. He will find that the light is visible at the same time on each of the 
two objects facing the perpendicular and the inclined hole. But it has been 
shown that, when the illuminated body is fixed at the opening, the light comes 
to these two places only from that body, when the intervening air between it 
and each of the perpendicular and inclined holes is continuous and uninterrup- 
ted by any opaque bodies. Therefore it is clear from this experiment that the 

1 4 sb light which simultaneously appears | in both places inside the chamber reaches 
them only from that opposing illuminated body which is in the opening. 

[84] Similarly, if the experimenter bores a number of holes in the inserted 
wooden block — each facing the opening in the white wall and in the ratio 
mentioned earlier 1 — and confronts all these holes, while open, with a large 
opaque object, he will at the same time see as many lights on this object as 
there are holes, and each light will be directly opposite the illuminated body in 
the outside opening. From this experiment it is therefore clear that from that 
body illuminated by daylight, light rectilinearly radiates in all directions, and 
that this radiation always takes place as long as that body is illuminated. 

[85] Having established this property of daylight the experimenter should 
now observe the [same] place when sunlight shines on that wall and examine it 
in the foregoing manner. He will find the case of sunlight to be the same as that 
of daylight, except that | the light coming from the sun’s light will be stronger 
and clearer. 

[86] Similarly, if he examines moonlight he will find it to be of this 
description; 1 and, again, if he examines the light of fire he will also find it to be 
of the same description. To examine the light of fire let him obtain a strong fire 
and place it opposite the white wall so as to illuminate this wall. Let him cover 
the opening in the wall with the white body as before, and close the door to the 
chamber that has the two holes. Let no light remain in the chamber. If he 
examines the light of the fire in the foregoing manner, he will find that the 
radiation from the light of the fire which appears on the body covering the 
opening behaves in the same way as the radiation of the [other] lights 
— differing only in respect of strength and weakness. 

[87] From all these experiments it is therefore clearly evident that from the 
accidental lights in opaque bodies light radiates in all facing directions; that the 
radiation of light from them takes place only in straight lines; that the light 
emanating from the accidental light is weaker than that accidental light; and 
that the emanating light becomes weaker as it goes farther. 


f 

i 


38 


Optics 


39 


1 49b | [88] Let us call ‘secondary lights' those lights that emanate from accidental 

lights. I say, then, that these secondary lights do not emanate from accidental 
lights by way of reflection, i.e. in the manner of reflection of light from 
polished bodies. Rather, they emanate from them in the way that the primary 
or essential lights emanate from self-luminous bodies. Further, if light radiates 
on any polished bodies, or on bodies some parts of which are polished, it will 
be reflected from them. And yet a secondary light will emanate from them in 
the way that light emanates from self-luminous bodies. Let us now explain 
this state of affairs, again by inspection and experiment — as follows. 

[89] Let the experimenter use a chamber into which sunlight may enter so as 
to reach the floor of the chamber through a hole that is fairly wide but not 
excessively so. Let him wait until sunlight enters this chamber, and when it 
enters and appears on the floor, let him close the door, allowing no light to 
come into the chamber except through the hole. He will then find the chamber 

1 50a illuminated by that light, and will find the light in all parts of the chamber. I 

Further, those parts of the chamber’s wall nearer that light will be found more 
strongly illuminated than the farther parts. Let the experimenter then hold a 
cup or some other hollow object in that light so that the whole light will enter 
that object. He will then find that the chamber will turn dark, and that the light 
that showed on the wall will disappear — except perhaps from an area in the 
upper parts of the chamber that may be facing the light in the hollow object. 
Then if he removes the object the chamber will again be illuminated and the 
light will appear in all parts of it. From this experiment it is evident that the 
light that appears in all parts of the chamber is but a secondary light that 
radiates on them from the light appearing on the chamber’s floor. 

[90] Let the experimenter then take a sheet of silver and by polishing it make 
it into a mirror. Experiments made with silver will be clearer than those made 
with iron mirrors, for the latter dim the lights because of their dark colours, 1 
so that of the lights radiating from them only those that are reflected are 

1 50b apparent | on account of their strength. (The reason for this will become clear 

when we speak about reflection.) The experimenter should then place the 
silver sheet where the sunlight appears, having made sure that the sheet is 
equal to or larger than the magnitude of the light. If the light exceeds the sheet, 
he should narrow the aperture so that the entire light may fall on the sheet. 
When this happens he will find that the light will be reflected from it to one 
particular place, because reflection can take place only at equal angles (as we 
shall show when we speak about reflection). He will also find that this light lies 
on the side opposite to that of the sun; the light due to reflection will appear on 
the wall opposite the hole or on the ceiling of the chamber if the latter is large. 
And he will find this light to be strong, similar in strength to the light of the 


I* 3 

sun and stronger than any light in the remaining parts of the chamber. And 
this light will be found to be limited and bounded. When this light appears, let 
the experimenter observe all parts of the chamber: he will find the chamber to 
be illuminated, and will find the light that is in it to be stronger and clearer than 
it was on account of the whiteness of the sheet. 

| [91] Now this light has no cause other than the light of the sun which at this 
moment is on the sheet. For if he lets this light enter into the hollow object in 
the way mentioned earlier, the light in all parts of the chamber will cease to be 
visible. But the light cannot be reflected from the sheet except to one particular 
place which is that where the light appears owing to reflection at this moment, 
namely the light that is distinct and separate and stronger than all the light in all 
parts of the chamber. Therefore the light that appears in all parts of the 
chamber is not due to reflection. 

[92] If the experimenter then takes an opaque white object, brings it near to 
the sheet, and holds it in an oblique direction 1 against the sheet on [any] side 
other than that of reflection, he will find that some light clearly appears on the 
opaque body. Upon this body being moved away 2 from the sheet, the light 
that is on it will weaken. When he brings it closer still, the light that is on it will 
become stronger. And when he turns this body round the sheet on all sides 

1 51b except that of reflection, | confronting the sheet with it, he will find that the 

light appears on it in all these positions. In addition, he will find that the 
reflected light remains the same. 

[93] Then upon removing the sheet he will also find that of the light in all parts 
of the chamber, only that which has been reflected will vanish. And if he 
replaces the sheet 1 with an unpolished body of a pure white colour, he will find 
that the light in all parts of the chamber gains in strength and increases, without 
finding in the chamber any reflected light similar to that which was reflected 
from the polished sheet. Ifin place of that body he puts a black or dark body, He 
will find that the light in all parts of the chamber will become dim and weak. 

[94] It is therefore evident from this experiment that the light that appears in 
all parts of the chamber is a secondary light emanating from the accidental 
light which has reached the floor of the chamber from the light of the sun, and 
that the radiation of that light on all parts of the chamber is not due to 
reflection. 

[95] Again, if he similarly examines the light of the moon, 1 he will find that 

i 52a it suffers reflection and also radiates in all directions just as light does | from the 

essential light of the sun. 

[96] Similarly, if an examination is made of the light of fire that radiates on 
floors and walls and on opaque bodies, light will be found to radiate from it in 
all opposite directions, as well as being reflected from polished bodies just as 
happens to all lights. 


40 


Optics 


41 


[97] It is evident from this experiment that light radiates from accidental 
lights in straight lines to all opposite sides in the same way as from essential 
lights; that this radiation is not due to reflection; that from whatever light that 
may be on polished bodies light radiates in all directions in the way it does 
from other bodies and is also reflected from them in the direction proper to 
reflection; and that the light reflected from polished bodies is stronger than 
that which radiates from them in all directions. 

[98] It also follows that from every part, however small, of the accidental 
lights that appear in opaque bodies light radiates | in every direction, however 
difficult it may be to examine the small parts individually and although their 
lights may be imperceptible. For every one of these lights is of the same 
nature, the difference between large and small parts being only a difference in 
quantity and not in quality; and therefore that which arises from the large parts 
in respect of their quality is inseparable from the quality of the small parts as 
long as these preserve the form of their species. If, therefore, the light of the 
individual small parts is not perceptible and the sense is unable to distinguish 
that light individually, that is because the sense fails to perceive what is 
extremely weak and small. By 'the parts of accidental light' I mean those lights 
that exist in the parts of a body that shines with accidental light, whatever the 
light. 

[99] We say also that reflected lights extend from the place of reflection only 
in straight lines. 

[100] It is easy to examine this experimentally in the following way. At the 
time when the reflected light appears in a certain place let the experimenter 
take an opaque body and with it interrupt the straight interval j between the 
polished surface from which the light has been reflected and the place where 
the reflected light shows. He will find that the light appears on the opaque 
body with which he interrupted that interval and disappears from the first 
place. If he moves the opaque body along the straight interval extending 
between the polished surface and the place of the reflected light, he will find 
the reflected light to be always on the body that has been moved along this 
interval. If he removes this body from the straight interval, the light will 
reappear on the first place. If he interrupts part of the straight interval with a 
small body, a part of the reflected light will disappear while reflected light will 
also appear on this small body. 

[101] If the place of the reflected light is near the polished surface and if 
across the straight interval between them the experimenter puts a fine needle, 
the shadow of this needle will appear in the reflected light, | and there will 
appear on the needle some reflected light. Upon moving the needle along the 
straight interval between it and its shadow, he will find the shadow always in 


I. 3 

its own place and the reflected light always on the needle. If he takes the needle 
out of that interval, the light will return to the shadowed place. He may ensure 
the straightness of the interval between the needle and the shadow by inserting 
a ruler to extend between them, then moving the needle along its length. 1 If 
the experimenter alters the position of the needle with respect to the circum- 
ference of the reflected light and places it inside the reflected light, he will find 
that it will cast a shadow on the reflected light. By moving it along the straight 
interval between it and its shadow, he will find that the shadow remains in the 
[same] place. 

[102] Now between the polished surface and the place of the reflected light 
there exist many intervals which are curved, sinuous or arc-shaped, and which 
are not interrupted by any opaque body. Thus if light were reflected in other 

1 54 a than straight lines, the reflected light would be visible in its place when | the 

straight interval between it and the polished surface is interrupted by the 
opaque body. But if the light does not appear in the place of reflection when 
only the straight distance between it and the polished surface from which it has 
been reflected is interrupted by the opaque body (but appears instead on the 
opaque body), and if the light reappears in its place when the opaque body is 
taken out of that interval, it becomes evident from this state of affairs that light 
is reflected from polished surfaces only in straight lines. And if the experi- 
menter examines the lights reflected from polished bodies of various shapes 
and figures, he will find the light reflected from them only in straight lines. 

[103] It is therefore clearly evident from this experiment that lights reflected 
from polished bodies are reflected only in straight lines, and it is evident from 
the reflection of light from the polished body to a particular place that light is 

1 54b reflected only in j particular straight lines, and not in all the straight lines that 

may extend from the place of reflection in all directions. 

[104] We also say concerning the lights that enter into the bodies the 
transparency of which differs from that of air (such as glass, water, transparent 
stones and the like), that they also extend after entering these bodies in straight 
lines only. 

[105] This, too, may easily be examined experimentally in the following 
way. Let the experimenter take a bowl 1 of pure and transparent glass and of 
even surface, or some transparent stone, and hold it opposite the sun at a point 
where sunlight appears on the ground or on a wall. He will find that it casts a 
shadow on the ground or wall, and also that sunlight passes through the 
transparent body and that a certain light which is less than the pure light of the 
sun appears in the shadow of this body. Then if the experimenter interrupts 
the interval between this shadow and the transparent body with an opaque 

1 ■« body, the emergent light that showed in the shadow will vanish and | appear 


42 


Optics 


43 


on the opaque body. If the experimenter moves that opaque body along the 
straight interval between the place of the emergent light and the transparent 
body, he will find that the emergent light always lies on the opaque body. If he 
takes the opaque body out of this straight interval, the emergent light will 
appear in the shadow. If he brings the transparent body near the shadowed 
place and interposes in the straight interval between this emergent light and 
the transparent body a fine opaque body, such as a needle or the like, the 
shadow of this fine body will appear in the emergent light. If he moves the fine 
body on the straight interval between it and its shadow, he will find that the 
shadow always remains in its own place. If he takes this fine body out of the 
straight distance between it and its shadow, the light will appear in the place of 
the body's shadow. If he puts this body at a place on the straight interval 
between it and its shadow, the light will appear in the place of the body’s 
shadow. If he puts this body at a place on the straight interval between the 
emergent light and the transparent body other than the first place, and 

55b examines it | in the same way as he did the first, he will find the situation to be 
the same as before. 

[106] Now between, on the one hand, the position of the light that has come 
out of the transparent body and appeared in its shadow at the time of 
experiment and, on the other, the transparent body which the light has passed 
through, there exist many different intervals, curved and arc-shaped and 
sinuous, which are not interrupted by any opaque body. If, therefore, the light 
passing through the transparent body extended after leaving it along an 
interval other than the straight interval, the outgoing light would appear in the 
shadow while the straight interval was interrupted by the opaque body. But 
since the light vanishes when the straight interval is interrupted with the 
opaque body, and since the light reappears in its place when the opaque body 
is removed from the straight interval, this demonstrates that the light that 
enters into the transparent body extends, after emerging from it, only in 

56a straight lines. And it is evident from | the extension of light to a particular 

point, and not to all points, that the light that passes through the transparent 
body extends, after emerging, only along particular straight lines and not 
along all straight lines that may extend from the point of emergence in all 
directions. 

[107] Further, the extension of the light in the transparent body itself, the 
transparency of which differs from that of air, cannot also take place except in 
straight lines. But the straight lines in which the light extends in the trans- 
parent body, the transparency of which differs from that of air, are not along 
the lines in which the light extends in the air towards the transparent body, nor 
along the lines in which the light extends after emerging from the transparent 
body — unless these lines are perpendicular to the surface of the transparent 


I. 3 

body the transparency of which differs from that of the body in which it 
j <{ : c exists, and if it is not perpendicular to | the surface of the transparent body 

reached, then it is refracted and does not pass through in a straight line. 
Similarly, when it emerges from the transparent body which it has reached, 
and it is not perpendicular to the body’s second surface, it is again refracted a 
second time and does not pass through in a straight line. (We shall thoroughly 
explain this later on when we speak about refraction.) 

[108] Furthermore, when an experimental examination is made of the light 
at the point of the transparent body where the light passing through it has 
come out, we shall find that from this light there also radiates a secondary light 
— just as secondary light radiates from all bodies that shine with accidental 
light. 

[109] This may be examined by means of light entering through a hole into 
a chamber. If the door to the chamber is closed so that no light is left inside 
other than that which has passed through the hole, and supposing the hole to 
have been made narrower than the transparent body, and if the transparent 
body is placed before the hole so that the sunlight entering through the hole 

1 5-a falls on it, | and having made sure that the entire light falls on the transparent 
body, we shall find that the lighc passes through the transparent body and 
appears at a particular place in the chamber. Then if a white body is brought 
near the transparent body from behind, but not on the straight interval along 
which the emergent light extends, some light will appear on the white body. 
And if the latter is made to recede from the transparent body, this light will 
become weaker — as in the case of secondary lights. If the white body is 
moved round the transparent body on all sides, but without entering the 
interval on which the emergent light extends, this secondary light will be 
found to lie on it, while the emergent light extends to the place appropriate to 
it. 

[no] It is therefore clear from all that we have explained and shown by 
induction and experiment that the radiation of all lights takes place only in 
straight lines, and that from every point on every shining body — whether the 
light in it be essential or accidental — light radiates in every straight line that 
can be imagined to extend from that point into the transparent body that is 
1 57b contiguous to it. From which it follows | that from every point on every 
shining body light radiates into the transparent body that is contiguous to that 
point in the form of a sphere, I mean, in every straight line that may extend 
from that point through the transparent body. It follows, too, that if a 
transparent body (be it air or something else) shines with any light whatever, 
then from every point of the shining light that is in it, light radiates in every 
straight line extending from that point through this transparent body. It is in 
this manner that all lights radiate from all shining bodies. 


44 


Optics 


45 


[111] It has also been shown that secondary lights are weaker than the lights 
from which they emanate, and the farther these lights are from their origins 
the weaker they become. 

[1 12] And it has been shown that reflected lights extend in particular 
straight lines and not in all the straight lines that extend from the point of 
reflection; and that the lights passing through transparent bodies whose 
transparency differs from that of the air also extend after coming out of the 

] ssa transparent bodies through which they have passed, in | particular straight 
lines and not in all the straight lines extending from the point of emergence. 

[i 13] Furthermore, we find that many of the colours in opaque bodies that 
shine with accidental light accompany the lights that radiate from those bodies 
— the form of the colour being always found together with the form of the 
light. And similarly with bodies that shine with their own light: their lights are 
found to be similar to their forms, which are of the same sort as colours. For 
the form of the sun’s light that is of the same sort as colour is similar to the 
form of the sun. Similarly, the form of the light of fire is similar to the form of 
the fire. 

[ 114 ] As for the forms of colours that accompany accidental lights, they 
appear clearly when the colours themselves are strong and the lights irradiat- 
ing them are strong, and when they are confronted with pale-coloured bodies 1 
that are moderately illuminated. For when bodies of bright colours such as 
purple, purpure, $a TT-red, basil-green, 2 and the like, are irradiated with 

i 5 s b sunlight, and there is near them | a white wall or a pure white body the light of 

which is moderate as a result of being in the shadow, then forms of these 
bright colours will appear on the wall or the white bodies near them along 
with the secondary light emanating from the sunlight which irradiates them. 

[115] Similarly, too, when sunlight radiates on a densely planted green 
garden, and there is in the open space near it a pure white wall which is shaded 
from the sun, the green of the plants will show on that wall. 

[116] Again, when sunlight shines on trees opposite and near which there is 
a white wall in the shade, or if the ground below them is light-coloured, 1 the 
green of the trees will show on that wall or ground. And if someone dressed in 
a pure white garment passes in the shade through the garden or in the space 
between the trees that are irradiated by sunlight, the green of the garden or 
trees will appear on his robe. 

[117] Now this may be experimentally examined at any time in the manner 
we now describe. 

1 | [118] Let the experimenter use a chamber into which sunlight enters 

through a wide hole of a magnitude not less than one cubit by the same, and let 
the light reach the chamber’s floor; let the chamber be narrow, its walls being 


I- 3 

close together, and let the walls be pure white. He should wait until the light 
enters through the hole. When this happens, and the light appears on the floor, 
he should close the door and draw a thick curtain over it so that no light may 
enter the chamber except through the hole. Then, in the place where the light 
appears, he should put a purple body, and let it occupy the same area as the 
light so that nothing of the light falls outside it. Let the surface of the purple 
body be plane so that the light may cover the whole surface and the form of the 
light may evenly spread over it. He will find the form of the purple colour on 
every wall of the chamber together with the secondary light emanating Irom 
the sun’s light. 

[119] If the chamber is large and the colour does not clearly appear on its 
walls because of their remoteness from the position of the light, let the 
experimenter bring a white cloth close to this position; let him not put it in the 

1 59 b light itself | but simply bring it near and hold it opposite the light. He will find 
the form of the purple colour on the white cloth together with the light. But he 
will find this form weaker than the light itself and will find it mixed with the 
light. If he moves the cloth farther from the position of the light, the colour 
that appears on the cloth becomes weaker still as does the light that is mixed 
with it. If he turns the cloth all round the position of the light where the purple 
body is placed, he will find the form of the colour on it at every position. If on 
all sides around the light he puts a number of pure white bodies, making each 
of them face the light, he will find the form of the colour on all of these bodies 
and will find it mixed with the light. 

[120] Let him then replace the purple body with a purpure one and examine 
its colour in the foregoing manner. He will find that its colour radiates in all 
directions. The result will be the same if in place of the purpure body he 
examines the colour of a basil-green one. 1 And if in the place of that light he 

1 60a puts a body of any colour whatever, | provided that it is a bright colour, he will 

find that its colour radiates together with the light in all directions. Then if in 
the place of the light he puts a pure white body, he will find that all parts of the 
chamber increase in illumination (as we said earlier) on account of the 
whiteness of the body placed in the light. Then if in place of the white body he 
puts a black one, he will find that the chamber becomes dark, and that the light 
that was in it becomes dim on account of the blackness of the body placed in 
the light. 

[121] It is therefore evident from this experiment that colour radiates from 
an illuminated coloured body and extends in all directions just as the light in 
this body does, both being always together; that the form of colour is mingled 
with the form of light; and that the form of the colour extending along with 
the form of the light is weaker than the colour itself, and the farther it is from 
the coloured body the weaker it becomes — as is the case with light. 


46 


Optics 


[122] l say, therefore, that the eye does not perceive these forms that appear 

6ob on the bodies facing the coloured body by reflection; | rather it perceives them 

in the way it perceives colours in the surfaces of coloured bodies; and I say that 
these forms exist in those places where the eye perceives them. For when these 
forms appear on the body opposite the transparent body, and if the surface of 
the body on which the form appears is plane, and the eye then moves through 
all positions opposite that surface, it will perceive the form from these 
positions in that surface and with the same appearance. Now if the coloured 
body is stationary and the opposite body on which the form appears is 
stationary, and the surface on which the form appears is plane, then reflection 
of the form of the coloured body from that plane surface can take place only in 
one particular direction and riot in all directions opposite that surface, whether 
reflection occurs through a form extending from the coloured body to that 
surface from which it is reflected, or through a ray issuing from the eye to that 
6u surface | from which it is reflected to the coloured body — for reflection can 
I take place only at equal angles and in a particular direction. (This we shall 

show when we speak about reflection.) 

[123] Since, therefore, the eye perceives this form from all positions 
opposite the surface on which the colour [appears], while this surface and the 
coloured body are stationary, then the eye’s perception of the form of the 
colour in the surface on which it appears is not due to reflection. Rather, the 
eye perceives this form in the way in which it perceives colours in the surfaces 
of coloured bodies. 

[124] Furthermore, let the experimenter take a vessel made of thin, 
transparent and pure white glass, fill it with a beverage having a clear red 
colour, and hold it in the sunlight inside the chamber we have described. 
Experimenting with these colours in places of little light is more effective; and 
it is also better, when experimenting with transparent bodies, that the hole 
through which the light enters into the chamber should be narrow, or made 

6 1 b narrow, but not too narrow. | Then let him place a white cloth in the vessel’s 

shadow. He will find the colour of that beverage on the cloth, together with 
the light that has passed through the transparency of the glass and the 
beverage, and mixed with it. And he will find that the colour which appears on 
the cloth is lighter and clearer 1 than the colour of the beverage. And as the 
cloth is moved farther from the vessel, the colour appearing on it becomes 
lighter and weaker. 2 

[125] Similarly, if he replaces the beverage in the vessel with water coloured 
with blue or green or some other bright and clear colour which does not 
completely destroy the transparency of the water and through which the light 
may pass and then, if he performs the experiment in the foregoing manner, he 


47 


I. 3 

will find that the colour of that water always extends along with the light 
passing through its transparency, and mixed with that light. 

[126] Similarly, if this vessel containing the beverage or coloured water is 
brought near the light of fire at night, and a white cloth is put close behind the 
vessel, the colour of that beverage will appear on the cloth together with the 
| light that has passed through it. The experimenter should ensure while 

making this examination that the cloth should be in a faintly illuminated 
shadow, and not irradiated by a strong light from another direction, 
j 1 6 2a | [127] It is therefore clear from this experiment that the colour existing in 

transparent bodies also extends with the lights passing through it into the 
adjoining air. 

jl [128] Therefore, the colours of all opaque and transparent coloured bodies 

j! (provided these colours are strong) are found, when experimentally 

f examined in the manner we have shown, always to extend with the lights 

; emanating from them, and mixed with these lights. And this being always 

! found by experiment to be uniformly the case in all colours, it is a natural 

property belonging to colours. And if that [property] is natural to colours, 
then it is inseparable from all colours, whether these are strong or weak. And 
i if colours accompany the lights and extend along with them, then they 

accompany all lights whether these are strong or weak and whether they are 
in small or large quantities. And if the weak [colours] are not visible or 
discernible by the eye, this is because the power of sense fails to perceive 
j things that are subtle. 

[129] Now it may be the case that the air and the transparent bodies receive 
( the forms of colours just as they receive the forms of lights, whether the light 

be present with them or not; and that colours radiate from all coloured bodies 
and extend in the air and in other transparent bodies in all directions just as 
1 62b lights do — this being a property of colours as well as of lights, | and that their 
extension and expansion through the air and the transparent bodies always 
takes place whether the light be present with them or not; while only those 
colours are visible that accompany the light, the eye not being able to perceive 
anything unless it is illuminated. 

( [130] It may also be the case that these forms do not emanate from the 
colours, nor do they extend in the air, nor does the air receive them, unless 
these colours have been irradiated by light. 

[131] But the thing that cannot be subject to doubt or uncertainty is that the 
form of colour and the form of light together emanate from shining coloured 

( bodies and extend through the air and through the transparent bodies that may 
adjoin or face those coloured bodies; and that the air and the transparent bodies 
receive these forms that pass through them along all straight lines extending 
from those coloured bodies into that air or into those transparent bodies. 


48 Optics 

[132] Some people believed that colour has no reality and that it is 
something that comes about between the eye and the light just as irises come 
about, and that colour is not a form in the coloured body. But the matter is not 
as the holders of this opinion believe it to be. For | irises are due only to 
reflection, and reflection can take place only from a particular position and not 
from all positions. Irises that appear in the feathers of some animals are due 
only to reflection of lights from the surfaces of the feathers of these animals, 
and for this reason the forms of these irises 1 vary with the lights. Thus when 
these animals, in whose feathers irises appear, change their position with 
respect to the eye, or when the eye changes position with respect to them, the 
forms of their irises undergo visible changes; the places in their feathers, where 
the colours of irises appear, change. If the experimenter closely and accurately 
observes the irises that appear in the feathers of animals, exercising care in his 
observation, he will find that each of the colours of these irises changes its 
place on the body on which it appears when the position of that body changes 
in relation to the eye — I mean the part of the feather in which that colour in 
the irises appears. The quality of the colour, too, may change when the place 
changes. When, however, these animals are | in obscure or faintly illuminated 
places, these irises cease to be visible in them, and their original colours 
become apparent. 

[ 133 ] But this is not so with colours that exist in coloured bodies. For a 
coloured body is simultaneously seen from all positions to be of the same 
form, although the light visible on the coloured body may vary with the eye’s 
position with respect to it on account of the reflection of lights. The colour of 
that body will be seen to vary only in regard to strength and weakness; but the 
quiddity of the colour will not be seen to change as a result of changing the 
position. Therefore the perception of the colours which the eye perceives in 
coloured opaque bodies is not due to reflection. That being so, these colours 
are not like irises. 

[134] One thing that clearly shows that colours are real and that they are 
forms in the coloured body and not something that comes about between the 
eye and the light, is the red that appears in a man’s face owing to shame, or the 
yellow owing to fear. For the colour of a man may be normal , 1 with no 
excessive redness in his face, but when overcome by shame, | a previously 
non-existent redness appears in his face, indicating his shame. Someone who 
sees him in both conditions thus perceives in the second moment a redness that 
was not in the man’s face in the first. Now the light falling on that face is the 
same before and after shame comes about; and the position and distance of the 
eye in relation to that face are the same at both moments; and the face, too, 
keeps the same position with respect to the side from which the light proceeds 
to it, and with respect to the luminous object and the illuminated places from 


I. 3 4-9 

which light comes to that face. And the redness that appears in the face while 
experiencing shame has no cause other than that shame. And shame is not 
something that comes from outside, nor is it related to the light or the eye that 
looks at the face. Therefore, the redness appearing in the man’s face is a form 
existing in his body and not something arising between the viewing eye and 
the light. 

[135] Similarly, a man may have a normal colour 1 before experiencing fear, 

1 64b then when he hears of something frightening and becomes extremely afraid, | 

a manifest yellowness appears in his face that was not there before. 

[136] Thus the reddening due to shame and the yellowing due to fear — 
when the conditions of the eye and of the visible object remain the same in 
respect of position, distance and illumination before and after the experience 
of shame or fear — is clear proof that colour is a form in the coloured body and 
not something that arises between the eye and the light. Therefore colour is 
not what it is believed to be by those who think that colour has no reality. It is 
but a form in the coloured body. Opinions may vary and uncertainty may 
arise with regard to the nature of the form of colour in the coloured body, but 
that it exists and that it is a form in the body and not a form arising from 
external [factors] cannot be subject to uncertainty. 

[137] Again, it may be that sight cannot perceive colour as it really is, on 
account of the fact that sight cannot perceive colour in the absence of light and 
because its perception of colour varies with the lights that radiate on the 
coloured body. But that colour has a reality in its own right cannot be denied 
on the basis of the variation in its perception by sight. 

1 65a [138] Having shown this, we say then that the form | which appears on a body 

confronting a coloured body is not something arising between the eye and the 
light, nor between the eye and the colour, but rather is the form of the colour 
existing in the coloured body, and extending from that coloured body to the 
opposite body. The extension of this form to that body and to sides opposite the 
coloured body is not due to the mediation of the eye or to its presence. Nor is the 
occurrence of the form on that body due to the presence of the eye or to its 
mediation. For it has been shown that this form can be found only with the light 
emanating from the coloured body, and mixed with that light, and that this 
form is found in all regions irradiated by the light of that body. And the 
radiation of light from a shining body is not due to the eye or to its mediation or 
presence. Rather, light radiates from it naturally. If, therefore, the extension of 
light in all opposite directions is not due to the presence or mediation of the eye, 

1 and if the form of the colour in the coloured body | is always found mixed with 

the light radiating from that body and is always found wherever thajt light 
extends, then the extension of the form of the colour to all sides opposite the 
coloured body is not due to the presence or mediation of the eye. 


50 


Optics 


5i 


[139] Further, it has been shown that the eye does not perceive this form on 
the body that confronts the coloured body by means of reflection. And it has 
been shown that the colour existing in the coloured body is a form in this body 
and not something that comes about because of sight. 

[140] If, therefore, colour is a form in the coloured body, and if the colour of 
the coloured body is not due to the eye or to its mediation; if, further, the 
extension of the form of this colour to all sides opposite the coloured body is 
not due to the presence or mediation of the eye, and the eye does not perceive 
this form on the body opposite the coloured body by reflection, but perceives 
it in the way it perceives colours in coloured bodies; then the form of the 
colour perceived by the eye in the body facing the coloured body is a form on 
the surface of that body, and not something arising between the eye and the 
light or | between the eye and the colour, and the occurrence of the form in that 
body is not due to the presence or mediation of the eye. 

[141] All this being so, if any coloured body is illuminated by any light 
whatever, then the form of the light and colour that exist in it always extends 
in all directions opposite that body through the air or transparent bodies 
adjoining it, and it radiates on all bodies facing that body, whether the eye be 
present or not. 

[142] It has also been shown that the form of light extends from every point 
on the surface of the illuminated body on every straight line that may extend 
from that point. And if the light so extends, and if the colours always 
accompany the lights, and if colour and light together emanate and pass 
through the air and transparent bodies in all the straight lines that extend from 
those bodies, then the form of the colour also extends from every point on the 
surface of the illuminated coloured body | in every straight line that may 
extend from that point. 

[143] Therefore, for every coloured body illuminated by any light what- 
ever, there extend from every point on its surface the form of the light and the 
form of the colour that are in it in every straight line that may extend from that 
point through the air or transparent bodies adjoining that point or facing it, 
and [these forms] radiate on all bodies facing that point, and extend in all 
directions and radiate on all opposite bodies, as long as [that point] is 
illuminated and if the bodies adjacent to it are transparent and of continuous 
transparency, whether the eye be present or not. 

[144] But why does this form not appear on all bodies facing coloured 
bodies, while it appears on white or pale-coloured 1 bodies? Why is it that only 
a bright and strong colour will appear on a white body facing it, but not the 
colour of every coloured body? And why is it that the bright and strong colour 
does not appear on the white body when the light in the coloured body is 
weak, but appears when that light is strong? Why, again, does this colour not 


I. 4 

[ 6 -i appear on | the white body when the latter lies in sunlight or in a strong light, 
but appears when the white body is in the shadow or in weak lights? All this is 
due to causes peculiar to sight, and not because the forms of colours do not 
radiate on all bodies facing them. Later on we shall thoroughly explain this 
and provide clear reasons for it when we speak about the manner in which 
vision occurs. But what we have shown of the properties of lights and of the 
forms of colours that accompany or join them is enough for beginning our 
inquiry into the manner of vision. 

CHAPTER 4 

ON THE EFFECT OF LIGHT UPON SIGHT 

[1] We find that when the eye looks at extremely strong lights it is pained 
and distressed by them. Thus when an observer 1 looks at the body of the sun 
he cannot bear to gaze at it, and when he glances at it his eyes are pained and 
distressed by its light. Similarly, when he looks at a polished mirror irradiated 
by sunlight, with his eyes at the point to which the light is reflected from the 

1 67b mirror, his eyes are distressed by the light reaching them from the mirror, | 
and he is unable to open them to meet it. 

[2] We also find that when an observer looks for some length of time at a 
pure white body irradiated by sunlight, then turns his eyes from it to an 
obscure or dimly lit place, he can hardly gain a true perception of the visible 
objects in that place, as if experiencing a screen between himself and them. As 
the [effect] gradually fades away sight will return to its own condition. 
Similarly, when a beholder looks at a strong fire, gazing at it for some length 
of time, then turns his eyes to an obscure or dimly lit place, he will also 
experience the same thing in his sight. 

[3] Further, we find that if an observer looks at a pure white body irradiated 
by daylight, so that the light on this body is strong although it is not sunlight, 
and he continues to look at the body for some time, then turns his eyes to a 
dark place, he will find the form of that light in the dark place, and with the 
same shape. When, subsequently, he closes his eyes and stares for a while, he 
will experience in his sight the form and shape of that light; then all that fades 

1 fifia away and sight returns to its own condition. The case is similar with sight | 

when it looks at length at a body irradiated by sunlight. 

[4] Again, when an observer looks for some length of time at a pure white 
body irradiated by the strong light of fire, then turns to a dark place, he will 
also experience the same thing in his sight. Similarly, if the observer is in a 
chamber with a wide aperture exposed to the sky, and he looks for a long 
while at the sky through the aperture in daylight, then turns his eye to a dark 


52 


Optics 


53 


place, he will find in that place, in the shape of the aperture, the form of the 
light he perceived through the aperture. If he now closes his eyes, he will also 
find that form in it. 

[5] All these cases therefore show that light produces a certain effect on 
sight. 1 

[6] Furthermore, we find that when an observer looks for a long while at a 
verdant and luxuriant meadow irradiated by sunlight, then turns his eyes to a 
dark place, he finds in that place the form of that light coloured with the green 

68b of the vegetation. Then if he views at this moment some white objects | in a 

shaded or dimly lit place, he will find their colours covered with green. If, 
again at this moment, he looks fixedly with his eyes closed, he will find in his 
sight the form of the light and the form of the green. Then these dissolve and 
disappear. Similarly, if he looks for some length of time at a body coloured 
with purple or lazuline or any one of the bright and strong colours, while 
sunlight shines upon it, then turns to some white objects in a dimly lit place, he 
will find them covered with that colour. 

[7] It is therefore evident from these experiments that illuminated colours 
also have an effect on sight. 

[8] Furthermore, 1 we see the stars at night but not in daytime. Now the 
only difference between these times is that the intervening air between our 
eyes and the heavens is illuminated in daytime and dark at night. Thus, as long 
as the air is dark we see the stars; when the intervening air between our eyes 
and the stars is illuminated by daylight, they are no longer visible to us. 

[9] Again, let the observer be at night in a place illuminated by fire, so that 
the light of the fire is spread over the ground; and let there be in this place 

69a certain minute objects or objects | with certain fine features, and let these 

objects be shaded and dimly illuminated; and suppose that the fire does not lie 
between the eye and these visible things; let the observer who perceives those 
objects and their fine features then move from this position so that the fire now 
lies between his eyes and the objects. Then, either these latter will disappear (if 
they are minute), or their fine features will disappear; the observer will hardly 
be able to perceive them as long as the fire lies between them and his eyes. If he 
screens the fire from his eyes, he will immediately perceive those minute 
visible objects which were not apparent to him; if the screen between the fire 
and his eyes is removed, those objects will cease to be visible to him. 

[10] These states of affairs therefore show that when strong lights shine on 
the eyes or into the air between the eyes and the visible object, it hinders sight 
from perceiving some faintly illuminated objects. 

[11] Further, let the observer look at a smooth body with fine designs 1 in the 

59b same colour as that of | the body; suppose him to be in a moderately 

illuminated place facing the sky or some strongly illuminated wall; let him 


I. 4 

then hold that body against the sky or the illuminated wall: some light will be 
reflected from it to the eye, and he will find the light that appears on the surface 
of that body and in the place from which it is reflected to have increased in 
strength and brightness. And if in these circumstances the observer contem- 
plates the smooth body, none of the designs will appear to him at the place 
where the strong and bright light is on that body. If now he inclines the body 
from that position so that the reflection turns to a place other than that of his 
eyes, while some moderate light still remains on the body, he will then 
perceive those features of the body which were not apparent to him when the 
light was reflected to his eyes. 

[12] It is similarly the case with a minute script on a smooth paper: as long as 
the light is reflected from the paper to the eye, sight will not identify the script 
or comprehend it; but if the surface of the paper is inclined, thereby changing 
its position so that the light may not be reflected from it to the eye, sight will 

1 70a perceive | the script and comprehend it. 

[13] Also, a low fire is visible in a dim light and is perceptible by sight; if, 
however, it is placed in the sun’s light, the body that is on fire will cease to be 
visible, but not the fire. If the fire is smoky, the smoke will be visible, but not 
the fire. 

[14] Again, if an opaque body of a bright, strong colour is placed in 
sunlight, and a pure white body is placed near it in a faintly illuminated 
shadow, then, as we described earlier, there will appear on the latter body the 
colour of the former. Then if the white body is brought nearer until it is in the 
sunlight, or until the light on it becomes stronger, the colour that was on it 
will disappear. And if it is returned to the faintly illuminated shadow, the 
colour will appear. Again, let the [white] body be placed in a strong light so 
that the colour does not appear on it; if while yet in the same place it is shaded 
by an opaque body so as to reduce the light that is on it, the colour will appear; 
if the shading body is removed, thus increasing the light on the white body, 
the colour that is on it will disappear. 

[70b [15] Similarly, if we approach | a bright-coloured transparent body to a 

strong fire, and we bring a white cloth into the shadow of that body, then, as 
we described earlier, the colour of the transparent body will appear on the 
cloth. If, subsequently, we approach another fire so close to the cloth that its 
light may shine on the cloth, the colour that showed on it will disappear; only 
the whiteness of the cloth will be seen. If the second fire is taken away the 
colour will appear on the cloth. 

[16] Further, some marine animals have shells and coats which, when put in 
a dark place with no light in it, appear as if they were fire. But when someone 
views them in daylight or in the light of fire, he perceives the shells but fails to 
see any fire. Similarly, the animal called ‘firefly’ appears as a flashing fire when 


54 


55 


Optics 

flying at night; when a beholder looks at it in daylight or in the light of fire, he 
perceives the animal but fails to see fire in it. 

[17] All these cases that we have explained therefore show that the strong 
71a lights of visible objects | cause the disappearance of certain features of some 

visible objects; while the feeble lights of visible objects cause the appearance of 
those features. 

[18] Furthermore, many features of visible objects, such as minute designs, 
incisions or [other] fine features, disappear when they are in dim light or 
obscure places. When they are brought out into illuminated places and the 
light on them becomes stronger, or if they are exposed to sunlight, the 
features that disappeared in the dark places and in the dim lights become 
visible. Similarly, sight is unable to perceive a minute script in obscure places 
or in feeble lights, but when exposed to strong lights, sight perceives it. 

[ 19 ] This state of affairs therefore shows that strong lights cause the 
appearance of many features of visible objects, while feeble lights cause their 
disappearance. 

[20] Furthermore, 1 we find that opaque bodies of bright colour, such as 

71b purple, lazuline, wine colour, and purpure, | when in obscure places or in 

feeble lights, look dull in colour. But when they are in a strong light, their 
colours look bright and clear. As the light on them grows stronger, their 
colours increase in brightness and clarity. And if one of those bodies is in a 
dark place in which only very little light exists, it will look dark and, failing to 
identify its colour, sight will take it to be black. But if it is taken into an 
illuminated place, so that the light falling upon it is strengthened, its colour 
will become apparent and distinct to the sight. 

[21] We also find that when a strong light illuminates white opaque bodies 
their whiteness and brightness increase sensibly, and when bodies of dull 
colours are illuminated by a strong light their colours become clear and 
manifest. 1 

[22] Further, we find that when transparent bodies with strong colours, 
such as deep-red beverages in transparent vessels, are in obscure places or in 
feeble lights, they look black and dark as if they were not transparent even if 
one attempted to look through them. But when they are in strong lights or 
irradiated by sunlight their colours become clear and bright, 1 and their 
transparency becomes apparent. 

72a [23] Similarly, j when transparent stones of saturated colours 1 are in obscure 

places, their colours look dark and dull; but when a strong light shines on them 
or they are held against the light so that it may pass through them, their colours 
become clear and bright, and their transparency becomes apparent. 

[24] Further, if coloured transparent bodies are held against light and a 
white body is held against them on the side opposite the light, as we said 


I. 5 

earlier, then, supposing the light to be strong, the form of that colour will 
appear in the shadow it casts upon the opposing white body; if the light 
shining on [the transparent body] is weak then its shadow, but not its colour, 
will appear on the opposing white body. 

[25] Furthermore, we find that peacocks’ feathers and the cloth called abu 
qalarnun 1 appear to change their colours at different times of the day according 
to the different lights shining upon them. 

[26] These conditions which are observed in colours therefore show that 
sight perceives the colours of bodies according to the lights irradiating them. 

[27] Since strong lights on visible objects cause the disappearance of certain 

1 - : b features in certain visible objects, | while they cause the appearance of certain 

features in certain visible objects; and since the feeble lights of visible objects 
cause the appearance of certain features in certain visible objects, while they 
cause the disappearance of certain features in certain visible objects; lurther, 
since coloured bodies change their colours according to the different light 
irradiating them, while strong lights shining on the eye prevent sight from 
perceiving certain visible objects; and, in addition to all this, since sight does 
not perceive any visible object unless it shines — therefore, the torm which 
sight perceives of an object must be according to the light in the object, and 
according to the lights shining on the eye at the time of perception and on the 
intervening air between the eye and the visible object. 

[28] As to the reason why strong lights hinder sight from perceiving certain 
visible objects — that will be explained when we speak about the manner of 
vision. 

CHAPTER 5 

ON THE STRUCTURE OF THE EYE 

[1] The eye consists of various coats, membranes and bodies, and it 

l originates j from the front of the brain. 

[2] Two similar hollow nerves split off from the front of the brain, 
beginning at two points on either side of it. It is said that each of these nerves 
consists of two layers and that, originating from the two membranes of the 
brain, they extend to the surface of the brain’s front at its middle; then they 
unite, forming one hollow nerve. This nerve then divides again into two equal 
hollow nerves which subsequently continue to the vaulting of the concave 
bones surrounding the eyeballs. 

[3] In the middle of the concavities of these bones there are two equal 
apertures which are similarly situated with respect to the common nerve. The 
two nerves enter through these apertures into the concavities of the bones. 


5 


Optics 


57 


56 

Once there, they spread out and expand, the extremity of each of them 
becoming like a funnel. Each of the two eyes is mounted on this funnel-like 
end of the nerve and fastened to it; and both eyes have the same position with 
respect to the common nerve. 

73b [4] Each of the eyeballs | consists of a number of coats. 

[5] The first is a white grease which fills the concavity of the bone; it is the 
larger part of the eye and it is called ‘conjunctiva’. 

[6] Within this grease there is a round and hollow sphere which is black in 
most cases or blue or grey in some eyes. 1 The body of this sphere is thin but of 
close texture and not frail; its exterior surface is fastened to the conjunctiva; the 
inside of it is hollow and lined with something like velvet. The conjunctiva 
encloses this sphere except at its front, for instead of covering the front of this 
sphere the conjunctiva circles round it. This coat is called ‘uvea’ [grape-like] 
because it is like a grape. 

[7] In the middle of the front of the uvea a circular hole leads into its cavity; 
it lies opposite the end of the cavity of the nerve on which the eve is mounted. 

[8] This hole and the entire front of the uvea (which is encircled by the 
conjunctiva) are covered on the outside with a firm, white coat called ‘cornea’ 
because of its likeness to white horn [in colour and] also in transparency. 

[9] There exists in the forepart of the uvea’s concavity a small, delicate, 

'4a white and humid sphere, of cohesive humidity. 1 | Though transparent, it is 

not perfectly so, but somewhat opaque. Being similar in transparency to ice, it 
is called ‘crystalline’. It is mounted on the extremity of the nerve’s cavity. 
There is in the front of this sphere a slight flattening similar to that of a lentil’s 
exterior. Thus the surface of its front is a portion of a spherical surface which is 
larger than the spherical surface surrounding the rest of it. The flattened part 
lies opposite the aperture in the front of the uvea and is symmetrically situated 
with respect to it. 

[10] This humour divides into two parts of different transparencies, one 
towards the front, the other towards the back. The posterior part resembles 
crushed glass 1 in transparency and is therefore called ‘vitreous humour’. The 
shape of these two parts together is the round shape we mentioned. 2 Enclos- 
ing them together is an extremely thin and frail tissue called ‘aranea’, because it 
resembles a spider’s web. 

[11] There exists in the anterior part of the uvea’s concavity 1 a circular 
opening which is at the extremity of the nerve’s cavity; the crystalline is set in 
this opening. The circular periphery of this opening, namely the extremity of 

74b the nerve, | surrounds the middle of the crystalline sphere; the uvea attaches 

itself to the crystalline at the circle surrounding this opening. It is said that the 
uvea originates from the inner of the two layers of the hollow nerve, and that 
the cornea originates from the outer layer. 


1 . 5 

[12] The cavity of the uvea is filled with a white, thin, fluid, clear and 
transparent humour, called ‘albugineous humour’ because it resembles the 
white of an egg in thinness, whiteness, and transparency. Filling the uvea’s 
cavity, it touches the front of the crystalline, and filling the hole in the front of 
the uvea, it touches the concave surface of the cornea. 

[13] The crystalline sphere is mounted on the cavity of the nerve; and [behind 
it] towards the nerve’s cavity is the vitreous humour. Thus the cornea, the 
albugineous humour, the crystalline and vitreous humours are successive and 
contiguous, and all these coats are transparent. And the aperture in the front of 
the uvea lies opposite the front of the nerve’s cavity; therefore, between the 
cornea’s surface and the front of the nerve’s cavity, there exist straight lines 
occupied by contiguous and transparent bodies. 

[14] It is said that the visual spirit issues forth from the front of the brain and 
fills the cavities of the first two nerves joined to the brain; and upon reaching 

1 75a the common nerve, the visual spirit fills it; then, | extending through the other 
two nerves, it fills them; and, arriving at the crystalline, it confers the visual 
power upon it. 1 

[15] Between, on the one hand, the circumference of the crystalline that is joined 
to the uvea, and, on the other, the aperture in the concavity of the bone from which 
the nerve emerges, there is a distance of some magnitude. The nerve divergently 
extends through this distance from the extremity of the aperture to the circum- 
ference of the crystalline, increasing in width as it recedes from the aperture until it 
reaches the circumference of the crystalline sphere and fastens upon it. 

[16] The body of the conjunctiva encloses this divergent part of the nerve as 
well as the uveal sphere; and the uveal sphere lies before the centre of the 
conjunctiva, towards the eye’s surface; and the body of the conjunctiva is 
joined to the uveal sphere and to the divergent and widened end of the nerve, 
keeping [the latter] in position. Therefore, when the eye moves, it moves as a 
whole, and the nerve on which the eye is mounted bends with the movement 
of the eye at the aperture in the concavity of the bone; for the eyeball is 
enclosed in this concavity, and it moves as a whole inside it. 

[17] Now the conjunctiva is fastened to the nerve and to the other coats 
1 75b within itself, and thus keeps them in position and is not separable from them. | 

Therefore, when the eye moves, the nerve must bend at the point behind the 
eyeball, namely, at the aperture in the concavity of the bone. Similarly, when 
the eye is at rest and the nerve is bent, it must be bent at the aperture in the 
concavity of the bone; thus the parts of the eyeball do not change their 
positions with respect to one another — neither when it moves nor when it is 
at rest. The bending of the nerve on which the eye is mounted must, therefore, 
take place at the aperture in the concave surface of the bone, whether the eye is 
moving or at rest. 


59 


I 76a 


I '6b 


58 Optics 

[18] Now the exterior surface of the cornea is a spherical surface which is 
also continuous with the surface surrounding the conjunctiva and the whole 
eye. And the whole eye is greater than the uveal sphere which is a part of it. 
Therefore, the exterior surface of the cornea is part of a spherical surface that is 
greater than the uveal sphere, and its radius is greater than that of the uvea. 

[19] But the interior surface of the cornea covering the aperture in the uvea 
is a concave spherical surface parallel to its exterior surface — for this part [of 
the cornea] is of equal thickness. Therefore, the centre of this concave surface 
is also the same as that of the exterior, convex surface. Further, this concave 
surface cuts the surface of the uveal sphere at the circumference of the 
aperture. Therefore, its centre is farther in | than that of the uvea — for this 
follows from the properties of spheres. 

[20] Moreover, since the uveal sphere is not in the middle of the conjunctiva 
but lies nearer to the exterior surface of the eye, and because that surface is part 
of a sphere greater than the uveal sphere, the centre of that exterior surface is 
farther in than the centre of the uvea, and so is the centre of the cornea’s 
surface. 

[21] Further, the straight line joining the two centres, I mean the centre of 
the cornea’s surface and that of the uvea, if produced rectilinearly, will reach 
the centre of the aperture in the front of the uvea and the centres of the two 
parallel surfaces of the cornea. For the concave surface of the cornea and the 
convex surface of the uvea are two intersecting spherical surfaces; and the line 
joining the centres of any two intersecting spherical surfaces passes through 
the centre of the circle of intersection and is perpendicular to its surface, for the 
line drawn from the centre of this circle perpendicularly to its surface will go 
through the centres of both spheres. 

[22] But the concave surface of the cornea is contiguous to the surface of the 
albugineous humour inside the aperture of the uvea and is in contact with it. 
Therefore, the surface | of the albugineous humour is also spherical and its 
centre is the same as that of the surface with which it is in contact. Therefore, 
the exterior and interior surfaces of the cornea and the surface of the 
albugineous humour that is contiguous to the cornea’s concave surface are 
parallel spherical surfaces, all of which have as their common centre a single 
point that lies deeper than the centre of the uvea. 

[23] And the line passing through the centres of the uvea, the cornea and the 
aperture in the front of the uvea, if rectilinearly produced, would pass through 
the middle of the nerve’s cavity on which the eye is mounted, since the 
aperture in the uvea’s front lies opposite the opening in the forepart of the 
nerve 1 which is the extremity of the nerve’s cavity. 

[24] Now the front surface of the crystalline is also a spherical surface, and it 
cuts the uveal sphere; therefore, its centre is deeper than the uvea’s centre. But 


I. 5 

the straight line joining their centres passes through the centre of the circle of 
intersection and is perpendicular to it; and the circle at the intersection 
between the front surface of the crystalline and the surface of the uveal sphere 
is either the circle that marks the boundary of the junction between the 
! — a crystalline and the uvea or is parallel to it — | for the flattening in the front of 
the crystalline lies opposite the aperture in the front of the uvea and is 
symmetrically situated with respect to it. Therefore, the limit of this surface, 
namely the circle of intersection between the two surfaces of the crystalline, 1 is 
either the joining circle itself or parallel to it. 

[25] And if this circle, I mean the circle at the intersection between the two 
surfaces of the crystalline, is the joining circle, then it is the circle of 
intersection between the crystalline’s front surface and the surface of the uvea. 
But if the circle at the intersection of the crystalline’s two surfaces is parallel to 
the joining circle, then the front surface of the crystalline, if imagined to 
expand with its sphericity remaining the same, will cut the uveal sphere in a 
circle parallel to this circle of intersection between the crystalline’s surfaces — 
the reason being the symmetrical position of this circle relative to the 
boundary of the uveal sphere. But this circle is parallel to the joining circle; 
therefore, the circle at the intersection between the surface of the crystalline’s 
front and the uveal sphere is either the joining circle itself or parallel to it. If it 
1 -7b is | the joining circle itself, then the straight line passing through the centre of 

the front of the crystalline and the centre of the uvea will pass through the 
centre of this circle and will, therefore, be perpendicular to it, this circle being 
the circle at the intersection between the two spherical surfaces. And if it is 
parallel to the joining circle, then, being parallel to the circle of intersection 
between the crystalline’s surfaces, it will be situated parallel to the joining 
circle and will be with it in the same spherical surface, namely the surface of 
the uveal sphere. And it lies parallel to the circle of intersection between the 
crystalline’s surfaces in a single spherical surface, namely that of the front of 
the crystalline; therefore, the straight line passing through the centres of the 
uvea and of the surface of the front of the crystalline and the centre of the circle 
of intersection, to which [circle] it is parallel, also passes through the centre of 
the circle of intersection between the crystalline’s surfaces and is perpendicular 
to it — because this circle lies parallel to the circle of intersection between the 
uveal sphere and the surface of the front of the crystalline in the same spherical 
surface, namely the surface of the front of the crystalline. But for any two 
parallel circles in a spherical surface, the line passing perpendicularly through 
* 7 Xj the centre of one of them will pass | perpendicularly through the centre of the 

other. Now this line also passes perpendicularly through the centre of the 
joining circle; for the joining circle lies parallel to the circle of intersection 
between the uveal sphere and the surface of the front of the crystalline in one 


6o 


Optics 


6 1 


spherical surface, namely that of the uveal sphere; therefore, the line passing 
through the centre of the uveal sphere and the centre of the front surface of the 
crystalline will in all cases pass perpendicularly through the centre of the 
joining circle — whether the joining circle is identical with or parallel to the 
circle of intersection between the front surface of the crystalline and the uveal 
sphere. 

[26] Further, since the front surface of the crystalline and the surface of its 
remainder are two intersecting spherical surfaces, the centre of the anterior 
surface is farther in than that of the posterior surface. But the straight line 
joining those two centres passes perpendicularly through the centre of the 
circle of intersection. And the line passing perpendicularly through the centre 
of this circle has been shown to pass perpendicularly through the centre of the 

?sb joining circle, | for this circle [of intersection] is either the same as or parallel to 
the joining circle. Therefore, the line passing through the centre of the uvea 
and the centres of the front of the crystalline and of the joining circle, being 
perpendicular to this circle, will pass through the centre of the remaining part 
of the crystalline. 

[27] But if this line passes through the centre of the remaining part of the 
crystalline, and it stands at right angles to the surface of the joining circle, then 
it extends through the cavity of the nerve on which the eye is mounted, since 
the joining circle is the extremity of the nerve’s cavity. 

[28] But it has been shown that the line passing through the centre of the 
uvea and the centres of the cornea and of the aperture in the front of the uvea 
extends through the hollow of the nerve; therefore, this line that passes 
through the centres of the crystalline’s two surfaces and through the uvea’s 
centre is the line that passes through the centres of the cornea and of the uvea, 
and through those of the crystalline’s surfaces and of the aperture in the front 
of the uvea and of the joining circle; it also passes through the centres of all the 
coats opposite the uvea’s aperture and is perpendicular to the surfaces of all 

79a these coats. | And it is perpendicular to the surface of the uvea’s aperture and to 

that of the joining circle, and it extends into the cavity of the nerve in which 
the eye is set. 

[29] And since it has been shown that the centres of the cornea and of the 
crystalline’s anterior surface are both on this line, and that both centres are 
farther in than that of the uvea, it is more likely than not that the centre of the 
crystalline’s anterior surface should be the cornea’s centre, so that the centres 
of all surfaces opposite the uvea’s aperture may be a single common point, and 
all lines going from the centre to the surface of the eye may be perpendicular to 
all surfaces opposite that aperture. Moreover, it will be later shown by proof, 
when we speak abo.ut the manner [of vision], that the centres of the cornea’s 
surface and of the crystalline’s anterior surface are one common point. 


I- 5 

Therefore, the surfaces of the eye’s coats opposite the hole of the uvea are 
spherical surfaces the centre of which is a single common point. 

[30] Furthermore, this centre being the centre of the exterior surface of the 

1 -i;b eye which is joined | to the surface enclosing the eyeball, and the eyeball being 

round, this centre is the centre of the eyeball and it lies within the eyeball. Thus 
the surfaces of the coats of the eye facing the uvea’s aperture have their centre 
inside the eyeball. 

[31] Therefore, when the eye moves, the point within it at the centre of the 
surfaces of the eye’s coats does not change, nor does it change its position 
relative to these coats; rather, it retains this position because the eye only 
moves as a whole, the mutual positions of its parts not being altered by this 
motion. The position of this centre being within the eye, it does not change 
with respect to the eye as a whole; nor do the positions of the eye’s coats 
change relative to the eyeball when it moves. Therefore, the position of this 
centre with respect to the surfaces of the eye’s coats does not change, neither 
when the eye moves nor when it is at rest. 

[32] It has, moreover, been shown that the bending of the nerve when the 
eye moves or when it is stationary can occur only at the hole in the bone’s 
concavity, for it must take place at a point behind the eyeball. Therefore, the 
bending of the nerve, whether the eye is moving or stationary, must take place 
at a point behind the centre of the eye. 

I soa | [33] Furthermore, the mutual positions of the parts of the eyeball do not 

change whether it is moving or at rest; therefore, the centres of the eye’s coats 
do not change their positions relative to the eye as a whole whether it is 
moving or at rest. Therefore, the position of the straight line passing through 
these centres does not change in relation to the whole eye or to its parts 
whether the eye moves or is stationary. But if the position of this line thus 
remains unchanged, then it does not change relative to the surface of the 
joining circle or its circumference; and this circle is the nerve’s extremity, and 
its surface is thus symmetrically situated with respect to the surface of the 
nerve’s cavity; and the cone-shaped part of the nerve is symmetrically inclined 
to this circle, on account of the symmetrical position of the crystalline relative 
to this nerve. 

[34] But if the parts of the eyeball do not change their mutual positions, then 
the surface of the nerve’s cavity from the circumference of the joining circle to 
the place where the nerve bends (that is, the cone-shaped section of the nerve) 

1 80b does not vary | its position, either in relation to the eyeball or to the joining 
circle. 

[35] But it has been shown that the line passing through the centres dc?es not 
change its position relative to the joining circle, and that it extends through the 
hollow of the nerve. But if the position of this line does not change in relation 


62 


63 


Optics 

to the joining circles, and if the surface of the nerve’s cavity, from the joining 
circle to the point where the nerve bends, does not change position with 
respect to the joining circle, then this line does not change position with 
respect to the surface of the nerve’s cavity until it reaches that bend. 1 
Therefore the line passing through the centres of the eye’s coats passes 
through the centre of the joining circle and is perpendicular to it. It therefore 
extends through the middle of the cavity of the cone-shaped nerve until it 
reaches the bend in the nerve, while its position, relative to the surface of the 
nerve’s cavity within the eyeball and relative to all parts of the eye and all 
surfaces of the eye’s coats, remains always the same and unchanged whether 
the eye moves or is at rest. 

[36] These, then, are the positions of the coats of the eye and of their centres 
and the position of the straight line passing through these centres. 

[37] Now the two eyes are similar in all respects — | in regard to their coats and in 
the shape of these coats and their respective positions in the eye as a whole. That 
being so, the position relative to the eyeball and to its parts of each one of the 
centres we have detailed earlier is the same as the position of the corresponding 
centre in the other eye relative to this other eye as a whole and to its parts. And if 
the positions of the centres in each of the eyes are similar to the corresponding 
centres in the other, then the line passing through the centres in one eye has the 
same position relative to the eyeball and to its parts and coats as the position of the 
corresponding line in the other eye. Therefore, the positions of the two lines 
passing through the centres of the coats of both eyes are similar in all respects. 

[38] Each conjunctiva is fastened on the outside by two small muscles, one 
towards the inner corner of the eye, the other towards its posterior; and each 
eye is covered by the eyelids and the eyelashes. 

[39] What we have expounded are the characteristics of the composition 
and structure of the eye and of the structure of its coats; all that we have 
mentioned of the eye’s coats and of its composition has been shown and 
expounded | by anatomists in the books on anatomy. 


I. 6 


Here is a picture 1 of the two eyes 




Figure i 


I. 

Lower eyelid. 

9. Web-like membrane 

1 3 . Aperture in the concave 

-> 

Cornea. 

(arachnoid), encircling the 

bone. 

3 - 

Uveal aperture (pupil). 

crystalline-vitreous body. 

14. Nerve attached to one 

4 - 

Upper eyelid. 

10. Conically shaped nerve. 

of the eyes. 

5 . 

Uveal sphere. 

1 1 . Conj uncti val sphere. 

t $. Common nerve (optic 

6. 

Albugineous humour. 

containing the eyeball. 

chiasma). 

7 . 

Crystalline humour. 

1 2 . Concave bone in which 

16. Optic nerve originating 

8. 

Vitreous humour. 

the eye is set (orbit). 

from the brain. 



17. Front of the brain. 


CHAPTER 6 

ON THE MANNER OF VISION 

[1] It has been shown previously that light emanates to every opposing side 
from the light existing in any body that shines with any light whatever. Thus 
when the eye faces a visible object that shines with any light whatever, light 
comes from the light in the object to the surface of the eye. It has also been 
shown that it is a property of light that it affects the sight, and that it is in the 
nature of sight to be affected by light. It is therefore most appropriate that the 
eye’s sensation of the light that is in the visible object should occur only 
through the light passing from the object to the eye. 

[2] It has been shown, too, that for every coloured body that is illuminated 
by any light whatever, the form of the colour of that body always 




Optics 


6 4 

accompanies the light emanating from it to every opposite side. Thus the light 
and the form of the colour being always together, the light reaching the eye 
from the light in visible objects is always accompanied by the form of the 
colour of that object. But if the light and the colour jointly reach the surface of 
the eye, and if the eye senses the light that is in the visible object through the 
light reaching it from the object, | then it is most appropriate that the eye’s 
sensation of the colour existing in the object should occur only through the 
form of the colour reaching the eye along with that light. 

[3] Moreover, the form of colour is always mixed with the form of light and 
not separate from it, and thus the sight cannot perceive light except as mingled 
with colour. It is therefore most appropriate that the eye’s sensation of the 
colour of the visible object and of the light that is in it should occur only 
through the form that is mixed of that light and colour, and that arrives at the 
eye from the surface of the object. 

[4] Furthermore, those coats of the eye in line with the front of the eye are 
transparent and contiguous. The first of them, namely the cornea, is adjacent 
to the air through which the form arrives; and it is a property of light that it 
passes through every transparent body. Similarly, it is a property of colour 
that the form of it that accompanies the light passes through the transparent 
body, and because of this it extends through the transparent air just as light 
does. And it is in the nature of transparent bodies to receive the forms of lights 
and colours and to convey them to opposite sides. Therefore, the form 
coming from the visible object to the surface of the eye traverses the 
transparency of the eye’s coats through the aperture in the uvea and, arriving 
at the crystalline humour, passes through that too in accordance with its 
transparency. | It is therefore most appropriate that the coats of the eye should 
be transparent in order that they may be penetrated by the forms of lights and 
colours that reach them. 

[5] Let us now establish the sum of all this accurately. 

[6] We say that the eye senses the light and the colour that are in the surface 
of a visible object through the form that reaches it from that light and colour 
and that passes through the transparency of the coats of the eye. This notion is 
the settled view of physicists regarding the manner of vision. 

[7] We now say that the manner of vision cannot be characterized in this 
way alone, for such characterization will collapse and prove untenable unless 
something more is added to it. For the form of the light and colour of every 
illuminated coloured body extends in the adjacent transparent air to all 
opposite sides. But the eye may at one time face many visible objects of 
different colours between each of which and the eye there exist straight lines in 
the intervening continuous air. Now if the form of the light and colour in the 
visible object facing the eye comes to the surface of the eye, the form of the 


I. 6 65 

i light and colour of each of the visible objects facing the eye at the same time | 

will come to the surface of the eye at that time. And if the form extends from 
the visible object to all opposite sides, and it reaches the eye only because it is 
facing it, then the form arriving at the eye from the object will reach the whole 
surface of the eye. That being so, if the eye faces an object, of which the form 
of colour and light arrives at the surface of the eye, and there are present at the 
same time opposite the eye other visible objects of different colours, then the 
form of the light and colour of each of these objects will reach the surface of the 
eye, and the form of each of those objects will occur on the whole surface of 
the eye. There will thus occur at the same time on the whole surface of the eye 
many different colours and many different lights each of which will fill the 
surface of the eye, and there will occur in the surface of the eye a form mixed of 
different colours and different lights. 

[8] Now if the eye sensed that mixed form, then it would sense a colour that 
differs from that of each of those visible objects. And if it sensed one of those 
forms without sensing the others, then it would perceive one of those objects 

1 84a without perceiving | the others. But it perceives all of those objects, and it 
perceives them as distinct from one another. 

[9] And if it sensed none of those forms, then it would not sense any of the 
opposing objects. But it senses them all. 

[10] Further, there may exist in a single visible object different colours, a 
pattern of lines, or an arrangement [of parts]; and the light and colour in the 
object emanate from each of its parts in all the straight lines that may extend 
into the adjacent air. Thus if the parts of the object are of different colours, 
then from each of these parts there will come to the whole surface of the eye 
the form of the colour and light of that part. Therefore, the colours of these 
parts will be mixed at the surface of the eye, and the eye will either perceive 
them as mixed or not perceive any of them. If it perceives them as mixed, the 
colours of those parts will cease to be discriminated and their order will be 
destroyed. And if it perceives none of those forms, no part will be perceived 
either; and if none of these is perceived, then sight will not perceive the visible 
object. But sight perceives the illuminated object confronting it, and it 
perceives the differently coloured parts of the object, and it perceives them as 
distinct and as having a certain order. 

1 Hb | [11] This being so, the manner of vision is either altogether different from 

this [preceding] characterization, or this characterization is [only] part of its 
[real] character. Let us now inquire whether it is possible to add to this 
characterization one or more conditions whereby the colours of visible pbjects 
would be seen as distinct and ordered and the parts of each of these objects 
would appear ordered and in agreement with what exists. 


66 


Optics 


67 


[12] We say, then, that when the eye faces a visible object, there comes from 
each point on the surface of the object to the whole surface of the eye the form of 
the colour and the light that exist in that point. And from each point on every 
visible object facing the eye there also comes in that moment to the whole 
surface of the eye the form of the colour and the light that are in that point. Thus 
if the eye senses through the whole of its surface the form of the colour and light 
coming to it from [any] one point on the subject’s surface, then it will sense 
through its whole surface the form of every point on that object’s surface and 
[also] the form of every point on the surfaces of all visible objects facing it at that 
moment. Accordingly, neither will the parts of any single object appear 
ordered to the eye, nor will those visible objects appear distinct. 

[13] But if the eye senses | through one point only (and not through the 
whole of its surface) the form coming from a single point on the object’s 
surface to the whole surface of the eye, the parts of the visible object will be 
seen as ordered and all visible objects facing the eye will be distinct. For if the 
eye perceives the colour of a single point through one point only of its surface, 
then it will perceive the colour of one part of the visible object through one 
part of its own surface, and it will perceive the colour of another part through 
another part of its own surface. It will also perceive each of the visible objects 
through a place on its own surface other than that through which it perceives 
another object. Thus the visible objects will appear to the eye as ordered and 
distinct and the parts of each of the visible objects will be ordered. 

[14] Let us now inquire whether this notion is possible and whether it agrees 
with what exists. We say first that vision must occur through the crystalline 
[humour], whether or not it is brought about by a form coming to the eye 
from the visible object. For vision cannot occur through any of the coats that 
are anterior to the crystalline (and that are only instruments of the crystalline) 
for the reason that | if some damage befalls the crystalline humour, while the 
other coats remain intact, vision will be destroyed, but if the other coats are 
damaged while retaining their transparency (or some of it) and the crystalline 
remains intact, vision will not be destroyed. Further, if the aperture in the 
uvea is obstructed, thus destroying the transparency of the humour inside the 
uvea, vision will cease even if the cornea may be sound. If the obstruction is 
removed, vision will return. Similarly, if a gross and untransparent body is 
interposed in the albugineous humour facing the crystalline humour, between 
this humour and the aperture in the uvea, vision will cease. But if this 
grossness is removed, or if the gross part falls below the straight line between 
the crystalline and the aperture in the uvea or shifts from it to one side, vision 
will return. All this is attested by the art of medicine. 

[15] Thus the cessation of sensation when the crystalline is corrupted while 
the other coats anterior to it remain sound is a proof that sensation must come 


l. 6 

about through this humour and not through those anterior coats. And the 
cessation of sensation when the transparency between the crystalline and the 
] surface of the eye is interrupted by | the opaque body also proves that 

sensation must take place at the crystalline and not at the surface of the eye. It 
proves also that the transparency of these coats only serves to make the 
transparency of the eye continuous with that of the air, so that the bodies 
between the crystalline and the visible object may be of continuous 
transparency. And the cessation of sensation upon the interruption of the 
straight line between the crystalline and the surface of the eye proves that the 
crystalline’s sensation can occur only through the straight lines between it 
and the surface of the eye. 

[16] We now say that if the eye senses the colour of the visible object and the 
light that is in it through the form that comes from the object to the surface of 
the eye, and if sensation must take place through the crystalline and not 
through the surface of the eye, then the eye cannot perceive this form until the 
latter has passed through the surface of the eye and reached the crystalline. But 
the form that comes from the visible object to the surface of the eye passes 
through the transparency of the eye’s coats, since it is a property of trans- 
parency that the forms of lights and colours traverse it and extend through it in 
straight lines (this we have shown with respect to air). And it all transparent 
bodies are tested, light will be found to extend through them only in straight 
1 .s6b lines. We shall show later on j when we speak about refraction how this may 

be tested [and established]. And if the eye perceives the colour and light of the 
visible object through the form that comes to it from the object, then sensation 
takes place when this form reaches the crystalline. And it has been shown that 
the eye cannot perceive the visible object as it is unless it perceives the form of 
each point of the object through one point only on the surface of the 
crystalline. Therefore, the crystalline cannot perceive the visible object as it is 
unless it perceives the colour and light of each point of the object by means of 
the form reaching it through one point only on the surface of the eye. But the 
form comes from each point on the surface of the visible object to the whole 
surface of the eye and passes through the whole of that surface into the cavity 
of the eye. Assume, then, that of what comes from a single point on the visible 
object to the whole surface of the eye and passes through the eye’s coats and 
reaches the crystalline, the latter perceives only that which comes to it through 
a single point on the eye’s surface; and assume that the crystalline perceives the 
1 * 7 * colour and light of that point on the object by means of the form which, | 

coming to it only through that point on the eye’s surface, reaches only one 
point on the crystalline’s surface; assume, further, that the crystalline does not 
perceive that same point of the object through the remainder ot the form that 
has reached its surface from the remainder of the eye’s surface; then vision will 


68 


Optics 


be accomplished and the parts of the visible object will appear to the eye as 
ordered and the visible objects as distinct. 

[17] Now vision can be achieved only in this way, if it takes place by means 
of a form that reaches the eye. But for this to be so, one of the points on the 
eye’s surface, through which the form of a single point on the object’s surface 
has entered, must be distinguished from the other points on the eye’s surface, 
and the line on which the form has reached that point on the eye’s surface must 
be distinguished from the other lines along which the form has passed, by a 
property on account of which the crystalline may perceive the form passing 
along that line, and through the point of that line on the eye’s surface, without 
perceiving it through another point. 

| 

[18] Now if lights are inspected, and if the manner of their penetration and 
extension through transparent bodies is experimentally examined, light will 
be found to extend rectilinearly in a transparent body so long as that body is of 
uniform transparency. If, however, light meets another body the trans- 

87b parency of which is different from that of the first body through which | it 
extended, it will not pass into it along the straight lines in which it formerly 
extended unless those straight lines are perpendicular to the surface of the 
second transparent body. But if those straight lines are inclined to the surface 
of the second body and not perpendicular, the light will be refracted at the 
surface of the second body and not extend rectilinearly. If it is refracted then it 
will extend through the second body along the straight lines into which it has 
been refracted, and these will also be inclined and will not be perpendicular to 
the surface of that body. Further, if some of the lines along which the light 
advances in the first body are perpendicular to the surface of the second body 
while others are inclined to it, the light on the perpendicular lines will 
rectilinearly extend into the second body, but the light on the inclined lines 
will be refracted at the surface of the second body and will extend through it 
along those inclined lines into which it has been refracted. (We have stated this 
earlier and promised to explain it, which we will do later on in the appropriate 
place — namely when we speak about refraction — and show the way in 
which this state of affairs may be experimentally examined and made manifest 

88 a to sense | and certain.) 

[19] That being so, when the forms of the light and colour come from every 
point on the visible object to the surface of the eye, only those along the 
straight line perpendicular to the eye’s surface will, upon reaching that 
surface, rectilinearly pass through the transparency of the eye’s coats. But 
those along other lines will be refracted instead of passing through rec- 
tilinearly, for the transparency of the eye’s coats is not the same as that of the 
air which is adjacent to the eye’s surface. The refracted forms will also be 


69 


I. 6 

refracted into inclined straight lines and not into perpendiculars extending 
from the points of refraction. Now for each point on the surface of the eye, 
only one straight line can be drawn to it which is perpendicular to that surface, 
while there is an infinite number of lines that can be drawn to it which are 
inclined to the eye’s surface. And the form that passes along the perpendicular 
will pass through the coats of the eye along the perpendicular; and all the 
forms that pass along the inclined lines to that point will be refracted at that 

[ point | and pass through the coats of the eye along lines that are also inclined; 

not one among these forms will pass through in the same line in which it 
arrived or along the perpendicular at that point. 

[20] Further, there will come at the same time to every point on the surface 
of the eye the forms of all points on the surfaces of all luminous visible objects 
that confront it at that time. This is because a straight line exists between the 
eye and every point in front of it, and because the forms of every point on the 
surfaces of luminous objects extend along every straight line stretching from 
that point. But only one among [the forms of| all points confronting the eye, 
which have simultaneously arrived at that point on the surface of the eye, will 
have travelled along the perpendicular to that point on the eye’s surface, while 
the forms of all other points reach that point on the eye’s surface along inclined 
lines. Therefore, each point on the eye’s surface is traversed at the same time 
by the forms of all points on the surfaces of all visible objects facing it at that 

1 89a time. | But only the form of a single point among all of them will rectilinearly 

pass through the transparency of the eye’s coats, namely the point at the 
extremity of the perpendicular drawn to that point on the eye’s surface. The 
forms of all remaining points will be refracted at that point on the surface of 
the eye, and will pass through the transparency of the eye’s coats along lines 
inclined to the surface of the eye. 

[21] Again, there will issue from each point on the crystalline’s surface only 
one line that is perpendicular to the surface of the eye, while an infinity of lines 
exist that issue from those points to the eye’s surface and that are inclined to it. 
Therefore, from that point on the crystalline’s surface from which a perpen- 
dicular to the eye’s surface is drawn passing through the aperture in the uvea, 
there will issue an infinite number of lines — excluding that perpendicular 
alone — that pass through that aperture and having reached the eye’s surface, 
will all be inclined to it. 

[22] Now [consider] all the lines that issue from a point on the crystalline’s 
surface and pass through the uveal aperture and, reaching the surface of the 
eye, are inclined to it. If these are imagined to be refracted in the manner 

1 required by the difference in transparency between the body of the cornea and | 

the air, then their extremities will reach different places and different points on 


! 


70 Optics 

the surfaces of the visible objects simultaneously facing the eye. Not one of 
these lines will meet the point at the extremity of the perpendicular. But the 
forms of the points at the extremities of all these lines on the surfaces of the 
visible objects will extend on these lines and, having reached the surface of the 
eye, will all be refracted to that same point on the crystalline’s surface. As 
distinguished from these, the form of the point at the extremity of the 
perpendicular will extend along the perpendicular and rectilinearly pass 
through to that point on the crystalline’s surface. Thus, if the crystalline 
perceives through a single point in it all forms that reach it along all lines, then 
it will perceive through every point on it a form mixed of many forms and 
colours mixed of many colours belonging to those visible objects that 
simultaneously face the eye, so that no points of those objects will appear to it 
as distinct, nor will the points whose forms reach that point [on the crystalline] 

1 90a appear to it as ordered. | But if the crystalline perceives through a single point 
on it that which reaches [that point] along one line only, then the points on the 
surfaces of visible objects will appear to it as distinct and the points on the 
surface of each one of the objects will appear to it as distinct, and the points on 
the surface of each one of the objects will appear to it as ordered. 

[23] But none of the points the forms of which reach the crystalline through 
refracted lines is more privileged than other, refracted forms; nor is any of the 
refracted lines more privileged than other lines. And the forms that are 
simultaneously refracted to a single point on the crystalline are many and 
innumerable. And there is only one point the form of which travels along the 
perpendicular to a given point on the crystalline, there being no other form 
travelling with it along the perpendicular, since all refracted forms are 
refracted into inclined lines. Further, the centre of the surface of the eye being 
one with the centre of the crystalline’s surface, the perpendicular to the surface 
of the eye will be perpendicular to the crystalline’s surface. Therefore, the 
form that travels along the perpendicular is distinguished from all other forms 

[ 90b in two respects: one is | that it extends from the surface of the visible object to 
the point on the crystalline in a straight line, while the others travel on 
refracted lines. And the second is that this perpendicular to the surface of the 
eye is also perpendicular to the crystalline’s surface, while the other lines on 
which the refracted forms travel are inclined to the surface of the crystalline 
since they are inclined to the surface of the eye. 

[24] But the effect of the lights that arrive along the perpendicular is 
stronger than the effect of those that arrive along the inclined lines. Therefore, 
it is appropriate that the crystalline should perceive through each point on it 
the form that arrives at this point along the perpendicular alone, without 
perceiving through the same point that which reaches it along the refracted 
lines. 


I. 6 71 

[25] Further, the centre of the surface of the eye and the centre of the 
crystalline’s surface being one point, all perpendiculars to the crystalline’s 
surface and the surface of the eye will meet at the common centre as diameters 
of the surfaces of the eye’s coats; and each of the perpendiculars will meet the 
surface of the cornea at one point; and only one perpendicular can be drawn to 

I y[a that point on the cornea; and no perpendicular can be drawn to | that point on 

the crystalline save that same perpendicular. Therefore, the form that issues 
from each point on the surface of the visible object along the perpendicular 
extending from that point to the surface of the eye will meet this surface at a 
point which none of the other forms travelling along the perpendiculars will 
meet; and it will meet the crystalline’s surface at a point which none of the 
other forms arriving along the perpendiculars will meet. Moreover, it has 
been shown that, for every coloured body that is illuminated by any light, 
there issues from every point on it the form of the light and colour in every 
straight line that may extend from that point. 

[26] Now between any point opposite a surface and each point on that 
surface there exists an imaginary straight line. And there exists between that 
point and the whole of that surface an imaginary cone which has that point as 
vertex and the surface as base, and which comprises all the straight lines 
imagined between that point and all points on that surface. 

[27] Therefore, if the form of the light and colour issues from each point on 

191b the surface of the illuminated coloured body in every straight line | that may 

extend from that point, then the form of the light and colour in the surface of 
that body will extend from each point on that surface to every opposite point 
along the straight line extending between them, and the cone formed between 
that point and the surface will enclose all the straight lines on which the forms 
extend from the whole of the surface to that point. Therefore, the form of the 
light and colour of every coloured body that is illuminated by any light will 
extend from the surface of that body to every opposite point through the cone 
formed between that point and the surface; and, by means of the lines meeting 
at that point, i.e. the cone’s vertex, the form will have the same order in that 
cone as the coloured parts in the surface of the body. 

[28] When, therefore, the eye faces one of the visible objects, there is formed 
between that point which is the centre of the eye and the surface of the opposite 
object an imaginary cone having the eye’s centre as vertex and the object’s 

1 92a surface as base. | And if the intermediate air between that object and the eye is 

continuous, there being no opaque body between them, and if the visible object 
is illuminated with any light whatever, then the form of the light and colour that 
are in the surface of that object will extend to the eye through that cone, and the 
form of each point on the surface of the object will extend along the line between 
that point and the cone’s vertex which is the centre of the eye. 


6 


72 


Optics 


[29] But the centre of the eye being one with the centre of the crystalline’s 
surface, all these lines will be perpendicular to the exterior surface of the eye 
and to the crystalline’s surface and to all parallel surfaces of the eye’s coats. The 
cone will comprise all these perpendiculars as well as the portion of the air 
through which the form rectilinearly extends from the whole surface of that 
visible object facing the eye. And since the crystalline’s surface cuts this cone, 
the form of the light and the colour that are in the visible object will occur in 
that part of the crystalline’s surface which is encompassed by the cone; and 

2 b there will have come to each point on that part of the crystalline’s surface | the 
form of the opposite point on the object’s surface along the perpendicular 
drawn from that point to the surfaces of the eve’s coats and to the crystalline’s 
surface; and this form will have passed through the transparency of the eye’s 
coats along that perpendicular, while no other form will have passed through 
with it along that perpendicular. Also, this form which occurs in this part of 
the crystalline’s surface will, by means of the lines drawn perpendicularly to 
this surface and meeting at the eye’s centre, have the same order as the parts of 
the opposite object. In addition to all that, there will have arrived in this case at 
each point of that part of the crystalline’s surface many forms from many 
points on the surfaces of the visible objects facing the eye at that time. There 
will thus occur in that part of the crystalline’s surface which is cut off by the 
cone many forms of many different colours. 

[30] Therefore if from that part that is cut off by the cone, the crystalline 
perceives only the form that has arrived at that part along lines of the cone, 

3 a without perceiving from that part | of its surface any form that reaches it along 

other lines, it will perceive the form of that object as it is, with its own order. It 
will also be possible for it to perceive in that case the forms of other visible 
objects through cones that cut off other parts of its surface, and it will be 
possible for it to perceive the form of each of those objects as they are and to 
perceive their positions relative to one another as they are. 

[31] But if the crystalline perceives the forms reaching it along the 
refracted lines, then it will perceive through that same part of its surface that 
is cut off by that cone a form mixed of the forms of the parts of that object’s 
surface and the forms of many different objects, and also mixed of many 
different colours. It will also perceive through every other part of its surface 
a form mixed of the forms of many different objects. Thus it will not 
perceive the form reaching it along that cone as it is, nor will it perceive any 
of the forms that arrive along the perpendiculars as it is nor any of the forms 

3 b that arrive along the refracted lines as it is. | It will not, therefore, perceive 
the form of any one object as it is, nor will the objects which face it at the 
same time, and the forms of which reach it at the same time, appear to it as 
distinct from one another. 


73 


I. 6 

[32] But the eye perceives visible objects distinctly, and it perceives the 
parts of a single object as they are ordered in the surface of the object, and 
simultaneously perceives a multitude of objects. Therefore, if vision occurs by 
means of the forms that reach the eye from the visible objects, then the 
crystalline cannot perceive any of the forms of these objects by means of the 
refracted lines. 

[33] Moreover, none of the forms of visible objects that reach the crystal- 
line’s surface will be ordered on this surface as it is in itself, and none of the 
forms of parts of a single object [will be so ordered except those] that reach 
[the crystalline] along perpendiculars to the surface of the eye. As for the 
forms that are refracted at the surface of the eye, their positions will be 
reversed as they occur on the crystalline’s surface and, besides, the form of a 
single point will cover a portion, not a point, of the crystalline’s surface. For 
the form of a point to the right of the eye, if it extends to a point of the eye’s 

I surface | in a line inclined to that surface, will be Fefracted to the left of the 

perpendicular extending from the centre of the eye to that point on the 
surface. And the form thus refracted from the extremity of the perpendicular 
will reach a point on the crystalline’s surface to the left of the point where the 
perpendicular intersects that surface. And the form of a point to the left of the 
eye that extends to that same point on the eye’s surface, and is inclined to it, 
will be refracted to a point on the right of the perpendicular and of the point on 
the crystalline’s surface on that perpendicular. For refracted forms approach, 
after refraction, the perpendicular drawn from the point of refraction but 
without reaching the perpendicular or going beyond it — this being a 
property of refracted forms. 

[34] Similarly, the forms of two points to one side of the eye that arrive at 
one point on the eye’s surface while being inclined to that surface on the same 
side, will be reversed on the surface of the crystalline. For the lines on which 

194 b the forms of these two points extend | will intersect at the point of the eye’s 
surface where the two forms meet, and will there meet the perpendicular 
drawn to that point on the surface of the eye. Therefore if these two lines, as 
they meet the surface of the eye, are both on one side of the perpendicular 
drawn from the centre of the eye to that point, the forms of the two points will 
be refracted to the opposite side. Furthermore, since the two lines on which 
the two forms have extended to a single point on the eye’s surface intersect at 
that point, their position, if rectilinearly produced beyond the point of 
intersection, will be reversed in relation to the eye and to the perpendicular. 
Thus the line which was to the left before reaching the surface of the eye will 
be to the right after passing through that surface; while the one to theleft will 
now be to the right. 


74 


75 


Optics 

[35] The same will be the case with the position of the lines on which the 
two forms are refracted from the same point on the eye’s surface. For the two 
forms which are refracted from one point together approach the perpen- 
dicular: the form that was on a line farther from the perpendicular now 

1 95a extends after intersection on a line also farther from the perpendicular | but not 
as far as the line on which it [formerly] was, and the form that was on a line 
nearer the perpendicular now extends after intersection on a line also nearer 
the perpendicular but nearer still than the line on which it [formerly] was. And 
similarly with all forms that are refracted from a single point. 

[36] If an accurate experimental examination is made of this matter, it will 
be found to be as we have described it. We shall show the way to its 
experimental ascertainment when we speak about refraction; all matters 
relating to refraction will then become manifest. But we shall not there 
employ for the explanation of the matters used in this Book anything that we 
have explained by those matters in this Book. 

[37] And so when the forms of two points inclined to one side of the eye 
extend to a single point on the eye’s surface, they will be refracted in two lines, 
the position of which relative to the eye is the reverse of that of the first two 
lines on which the forms extended to the eye’s surface. Thus the position of 
the two points which the two forms reach on the crystalline’s surface will be 

195b the reverse of that of the points from which | the forms departed. Therefore, 

the position of all forms that are refracted from one point on the surface of the 
eye will be reversed on the crystalline’s surface. 

[38] Moreover, the form coming from any point opposite the eye to the 
whole surface of the eye will be refracted from the whole of that surface. But 
the form that is refracted from the whole surface of the eye will be refracted to 
a part of the crystalline that has magnitude and not to a single point. For if the 
refracted forms were to meet after refraction at one point, they would either 
cut the perpendiculars, at the extremities of which they were refracted and cross 
those perpendiculars, or the form would leave the plane in which it has been 
refracted. But no refracted form can meet the perpendicular at the extremity 
of which it has been refracted, nor can it cross that perpendicular or leave the 
plane in which it is refracted (all these matters being manifest when made 
subject to experiment). Therefore, the form of a single point on the visible 
object will not as a result of refraction occur on the surface of the crystalline in 
one point, but in a part of that surface that has magnitude. And the forms of 

196a the different points on the surfaces of visible objects | will not by refraction 
occur on the crystalline’s surface with their relative positions on the surfaces of 
those objects, but will be reversed. Therefore, not one of the forms of the 
visible objects reaching the crystalline’s surface along refracted lines will be 


I. 6 

arranged on this surface in the same manner as they are on the surfaces of those 
objects. And it has been shown that the forms passing along the perpendicu- 
lars retain their own arrangements on the surface of the crystalline, because 
they rectilinearly extend from the surfaces of the objects to the crystalline’s 
surface. Therefore, of all the forms of objects that reach the crystalline’s 
surface only those extending along the perpendiculars will be arranged on that 
surface in the same way as they are on the surfaces of those objects. 

[39] Therefore, if the eye senses the visible objects through forms that come 
to it from the surfaces of those objects, then the eye will perceive only those 
forms of the objects that reach it along the straight lines whose extremities 
meet at the centre of the eye. For the eye [as a matter of fact] perceives the 
forms only in the arrangement they have on the surfaces of visible objects. 

[40] Furthermore, if the centre of the eye’s surface is not the same as the 

1 96b centre of the crystalline’s surface, | then the straight lines drawn from the 

centre of the eye through the aperture in the uvea to the visible objects will not 
be perpendicular to the crystalline’s surface but inclined to it, and their 
positions relative to the crystalline’s surface will not be the same, save one line 
only among them, namely that passing through the two centres. But the 
forms coming from the surfaces of visible objects to the crystalline’s surface 
cannot be sensed by the crystalline except through those lines alone, namely 
those that are perpendicular to the surface of the eye, i.e. the surface of the 
cornea. For only the forms arriving along these perpendiculars will have the 
same order on the surface of the crystalline surface as they have on the surfaces 
of visible objects. 

[41] Thus if the crystalline perceives visible objects through the forms that 
reach it, and if it perceives the forms through these lines alone, then assuming 
these lines not to be perpendicular to its surface, it would perceive the forms 
through lines variously positioned in relation to its surface and inclined to that 
surface. And if it perceives the forms through variously situated and inclined 
lines, then it perceives all refracted forms and perceives them through lines 

i 97a variously situated | with respect to its surface. And if it perceives the refracted 

forms through variously situated lines, then, as was previously shown, none 
of the visible objects will appear to it distinct. And if the crystalline cannot 
perceive the refracted forms through variously situated lines, then it cannot 
perceive the forms of visible objects through lines perpendicular to the surface 
of the eye unless these lines are perpendicular to its own surface and similarly 
situated with respect to this surface. But these lines cannot be perpendicular to 
the crystalline’s surface unless the centre of this surface and the centre of the 
eye’s surface are one common point. Thus if sight senses the visible objects 
through the forms that reach it from the colours and lights of those objects, 
and [it senses them] distinctly, then the centre of the eye’s surface and the 


7 6 


Optics 


11 


centre of the surface of the crystalline must be one common point; 1 and the eye 
should not perceive any of the forms of visible objects except through the 
straight lines whose extremities meet at this centre alone. 

[42] But it is not impossible that the two centres should be one and the 
same, for it has been shown that they both lie behind the centre of the uvea and 
on the straight line passing through all the centres. And if it is not impossible 
that the centres should be one, and that the straight lines drawn from the 
centres 1 should be perpendicular to both surfaces, i.e. the crystalline’s surface 
and the surface of the eye, | then it is not impossible that the eye’s perception of 
visible objects should be due to the forms coming to it from the forms of the 
colours and lights that are in the surfaces of those objects, given that its 
perception of these forms occurs through the perpendiculars alone. This is so 
by virtue of the fact that the nature of sight is to receive what comes to it of the 
forms of visible objects 2 and that its nature is further characterized by 
receiving only the forms coming to it through certain lines, and not all lines, 
i.e. the straight lines whose extremities meet at the centre of the eye alone, 
these lines being alone characterized as diameters of the eye and perpendicular 
to the surface of the sentient body. Thus sensation occurs by means of the 
forms that reach [the eye] from the visible objects, and these lines are like 
instruments of the eye by means of which visible objects appear to it distinct 
and the parts of each visible object ordered. 

[43] That sight should be especially related to certain lines rather than others 
has parallels in natural things. For lights radiate from luminous bodies and 
extend only in straight lines, not in arched or curved lines. And heavy bodies 
move naturally downwards | in straight lines, not in curved, arched or sinuous 
lines. Nor do they move along all the straight lines between them and the 
surface of the earth, but on particular straight lines, namely those that are 
perpendicular to the surface of the earth and are diameters of the earth. And 
heavenly bodies move in circular lines, not in straight or variously ordered 
lines. And if natural movements are examined they will each be found to be 
especially related to certain lines rather than others. It is, therefore, not 
impossible that the eye, in its reception of the effects of lights and colours, 
should be especially related only to the straight lines that meet at its centre and 
are perpendicular to its surface. That sight perceives visible objects through 
the straight lines whose extremities meet at the centre of the eye is accepted by 
all mathematicians, there being no disagreement among them about it. And 
these lines are what mathematicians call ‘lines of the ray’. 

[44] Now if this notion is possible and not absurd, and if the forms of light 
and colours reach the eye and pass through the transparency of the eye’s coats 
because it is a property of these forms to pass through transparent bodies and it 


1 . 6 

( l>S b is a property | of transparent bodies that they receive these forms and convey 

them to the opposite sides; further, if vision is not effected by the reception of 
these forms unless the eye receives them along the perpendiculars alone; then 
sight perceives the lights and colours that are in the surfaces of visible objects 
only through the forms that come to it from the surfaces of those objects, and 
it does not perceive these forms except through the straight lines whose 
extremities meet at the centre of the eye. 

[45] Let us now accurately establish what has been settled in all that we have 
mentioned. 

[46] We say that sight perceives the light and colour that are in the surface of 
a visible object through the form that extends from that light and colour 
through the intervening transparent body between the eye and the object; and 
sight does not perceive any of the forms of visible objects except through the 
straight lines that are imagined to extend between the object and the centre ot 
the eye. Having established that, and, moreover, having shown that this 
notion is possible and not absurd, we shall now establish our thesis. 

[47] We sav that vision can only occur in this manner for [the following 
reasons]. When the eye senses a visible object alter it had no sensation ot it. 

I yya then something has happened to it that | did not exist [earlier]; but nothing 

happens after it was not unless it is brought about by a cause. Further, we find 
that when the visible object faces the eye it is sensed by the eye; when it ceases 
to be opposite the eye, the eye has no sensation of it; when the object again 
faces the eye, the sensation returns. Similarly, when the eye has a sensation of a 
visible object and the eyelids are then closed, the sensation ceases; when the 
eyelids are opened while the object [still] faces the eye, the sensation returns. 
Now a cause is such that if it ceases, the effect ceases, and if it returns, the effect 
returns. Therefore the cause that produces that condition in the eye is the 
visible object, and it produces that condition when it faces the eye. For when 
the object is present and opposite the eye, sensation occurs, and when absent 
or not opposite the eye, sensation ceases. Therefore the eye senses the visible 
object through something produced by the object in the eye when facing it. 

[48] Moreover, the eye does not perceive the visible object unless the 
intervening body between them is transparent. And the eye does not perceive 
the object across the air between them on account of the air’s moistness or 
rarity but because of its transparency. For also when there is between the eye 

1 99b and the object a transparent stone, | or any transparent body whatever, the eye 

perceives the object behind it. And the eye’s perception of the visible object is 
according to the transparency of the intermediate body: the greater the 
transparency, the better and clearer is the eye’s sensation. Similarly* when 
there is some clear and transparent water between the eye and the visible 
object, the eye perceives the object behind the water. And when the eye 


78 Optics 

perceives a visible object in clear and transparent water, and the water is then 
coloured with a strong dye so as to destroy its transparency while its moistness 
is retained, then the eye will not perceive that object in the water. 

[49] It is therefore manifest from these states of affairs that vision is only 
effected through the transparency of the intermediate body, not through its 
moistness or rarity. Thus the thing that the visible object produces in the eye 
when facing it and that brings about the sensation is effected only through the 
transparency of the intermediate body between the eye and the object, and it is 
not effected when an opaque body lies between them. Therefore, the eye 
perceives the light and colour that are in the visible object only through 

i 1 00a something | that this light and colour produce in the eye. And that thing is not 
produced by the light and colour in the eye unless the intermediate body 
between the eye and the object is transparent; and it is not produced if the 
intermediate body is opaque. 

[50] Now, as far as light and colour are concerned, nothing characterizes 
transparency and differentiates it from opacity other than that the form of 
light and colour passes through transparency but not through opacity, and 
that a transparent body receives the form of light and colour and conveys it to 
opposite sides, whereas an opaque body lacks this property. But if the eye 
does not sense the light and colour that are in the visible object except through 
the occurrence of something produced by them in the eye; and if that thing is 
only produced in the eye when the intermediate body between the eye and the 
object is transparent, and is not produced when an opaque body lies between 
them; and if (with regard to light and colour) a transparent body is not 
characterized by anything that distinguishes it from an opaque body other 
than the fact that it receives the forms of lights and colours and conveys them 
to opposite sides; and since it has been shown that when the eye faces a visible 

1 roob object, the form of the light | and colour in the object comes to the eye and 
occurs on the surface of the sentient organ; it follows that the eye senses the 
light and colour that are in the visible object only through the form that 
extends in the transparent body from the object to the eye; it also follows that 
this form is that thing that is produced by the object in the eye facing it 
through the mediation of the transparent body and through which the eye 
senses the light and colour of that object. 

[51] It may be said that the transparent body receives something from the 
eye which it conveys to the visible object, and that sensation occurs through 
the continuity of this thing between the eye and the object. That is the view of 
those who hold the doctrine of the ray. 

[52] Let us assume the matter to be so and that a ray issues from the eye and, 
having traversed the transparency of the transparent body, reaches the visible 


I. 6 79 

object, 1 and that sensation is brought about by means of this ray. If that is the 
case and sensation only occurs through this ray, then such a sensation either 
comes to the eye or it does not. If sensation is to occur through the ray but does 
not come to the eye, then the eye will sense nothing. The eye does, however, 

1 i0ia sense the visible object. | And if it senses the visible object and gains this 
sensation of the object only through the mediation of the ray between them, 
then, as it has been shown that the eye can sense the object only through 
something produced in it by the object, it follows that this ray which senses 
the object conveys something of the object to the eye through which the eye 
senses the object. But if the ray conveys to the eye something of the object 
through which the eye senses the object, it follows that the eye can sense the 
light and colour that are in the visible object only through something that 
comes to it from that light and colour, and the ray is that which conveys that 
thing. Thus, in any event, vision will occur only as a result of the passage of 
something from the visible object to the eye, whether a ray issues from the eye 
or not. 

[53] It has, moreover, been shown that vision is only effected through the 
transparency of the intermediate body between the eye and the visible object, 
but not when there is an intervening opaque body; and it is manifest that a 
transparent body is not characterized by anything relating to light and colour 
that differentiates it from an opaque body except that it receives the forms of 

1 10 1 b the lights and colours and conveys them to opposite sides. | Furthermore, it 
has been shown that these forms always extend in the air and in transparent 
bodies and that the latter receive and convey them to all sides opposite those 
lights and colours and to the eye assumed to be situated opposite them. But, if 
vision occurs only through the passage of something from the visible object to 
the eye, and it is only effected through the transparency of the intermediate 
body between the eye and the object but not when an opaque body intervenes; 
further if the transparent body is not characterized by anything relating to 
light and colour that differentiates it from an opaque body except that it 
receives the forms of lights and colours and conveys them to opposite sides; 
and it has been shown that the forms of the light and colour that are in the 
visible object reach the eye when it is situated opposite the object; it follows 
that, in any event, what passes from the object to the eye, through which the 
eye perceives the light and colour in the object, is nothing but this form, 
whether a ray issues from the eye or not. 

[54] It has also been shown that the forms of lights and colours always 
radiate into the air and into transparent bodies and extend through them to 

1 102a opposite sides, | whether the eye is present or not. If, therefore, the eye senses 
the light and colour that are in the visible object only through this form, and if 
this form always extends through the air and through transparent bodies to 


So 


Optics 


I opposite sides, whether the eye is present or not, then the issuing forth of a ray 

is futile and superfluous. Therefore the eye senses the light and colour that are 
in the visible object only through the form that comes to it from the light and 
colour that are in the object [and] that always radiate into the air and into the 
transparent bodies and extend to opposite sides. 

[55] It has also been shown that the form of each point on the visible object 
reaches the opposite eye on many different lines, and that the eye cannot 
perceive the form of the object in the order it has in the surface of the object 
(assuming this perception to be brought about by the form that comes from 
the object) unless the eye receives the forms through the straight lines that are 

1 io;b perpendicular to the surface of the eye and to the sentient organ. | And [it has 
been shown] that the straight lines cannot be perpendicular to these two surfaces 
unless their centres are one common point — this [latter condition] being a 
possibility and no absurdity. But it has now been shown that vision can be 
effected only through the forms reaching the eye from the visible object; and the 
| eye cannot perceive the visible objects through the forms coming to it from 

those objects unless it receives them through lines perpendicular to the surface 
of the eye and to the surface of the sentient organ; and straight lines cannot be 
perpendicular to both of these surfaces unless their centre is a single point; 
therefore the centre of the crystalline’s surface and of the eye’s surface must be 
one and the same point; and the eye can perceive any of the forms of the visible 
objects only through the straight lines whose extremities meet at this centre. 
This is the notion which we previously promised in our discourse [i. e. chapter] 
on The Structure of the Eye we would explain in the present chapter, and we 
1 103a have now explained it — | namely that the centre of the crystalline and the centre 

of the surface of the eye are one common point. 

[56] Now that we have shown this, it remains for us to expose the opinion 
of those who hold the doctrine of the ray and show what is unsound and what 
is sound in it. We say: If vision occurs only through something that issues 
forth from the eye to the visible object, then that thing is either a body or not. 
If it is, then, when we look at the sky and see it and the stars in it and discern 
and contemplate them, there will issue at that moment from our eyes a body 
which will fill [the space] between the sky and the earth without the eye losing 
anything of itself. But this is quite impossible and quite absurd. Vision does 
not, therefore, occur by means of a body that goes out of the eye. If, on the 
other hand, the thing that issues forth from the eye is not a body, then it will 
not sense the visible object, for sensation belongs only to animate bodies. 
Therefore, nothing issues from the eye that senses the visible object. 

[57] Now it is evident that 1 vision occurs through the eye. If that is so, and if 
1 103b the eye perceives the visible object | only through something that issues from 


I. 6 81 

it to the object, and if that issuing entity cannot sense the object, then what 
issues from the eye does not [itself] sense the object but rather conveys to the 
eye something of the object through which the latter is perceived by the eye. 
However, what is said to issue from the eye is not something perceptible by 
the senses but conjectured. But it is not permissible to conjecture anything 
unless there is a reason that calls for this conjecture. Now the reason that led 
those who hold the doctrine of the ray to maintain their doctrine is that they 
found that the eye perceives the visible object when an interval exists between 
them; and it was generally recognized that sensation occurred only through 
touch; so they also thought that vision occurred through something issuing 
from the eye to the visible object so that this entity may either sense the object 
in its own place or take something of the object back to the eye where it is 
sensed. 

[58] But if it is not possible that a body should issue from the eye and sense 
the visible object; and if nothing can sense the visible object other than an 

1 104a animate body, it only remains to conjecture that what issues | from the eye to 
the object receives from the latter something which it conveys to the eye. And 
since it has been shown that the air and the transparent bodies receive the form 
of the visible object and convey it to the eye and to every body opposite the 
object, then that which is thought to convey to the eye something of the 
visible object is the air and the transparent bodies placed between the eye and 
the object. But if the air and the transparent bodies convey to the eye 
something of the visible object at all times and in any event (provided that the 
eye faces the object) without the need for something that issues forth from the 
eye, then the reason that led those who hold the doctrine of the ray to maintain 
their doctrine ceases to exist. For they were led to assert that doctrine by their 
belief that vision is effected only through something that extends between the 
eye and the object for the purpose of conveying something of the object to the 
eye. But if the air and the transparent bodies placed between the eye and the 
object convey to the eye something of the object without the need for 
anything to issue from the eye; and, moreover, if these bodies extend between 

1 104b the eye and the object; then the need to affirm | the existence of anything else 
through which something is conveyed to the eye no longer exists, and there 
no longer exists a reason for their saying that a conjectural entity conveys to 
the eye something of the object. And if no reason remains for maintaining the 
doctrine of the ray, then this doctrine is invalidated. 

[59] Moreover, all that mathematicians who hold the doctrine of the ray 
have used in their reasonings and demonstrations are imaginary lines which 
they call ‘lines of the ray’. And we have shown that the eye cannot perceive 
any visible object except through these lines alone. Thus the view of those 
who take the radial lines to be imaginary lines is correct, and we have shown 


1 


82 


Optics 


that vision is not effected without them. But the view of those who think that 
something issues from the eye other than the imaginary lines is impossible and 
we have shown its impossibility by the fact that it is not warranted by 
anything that exists, nor is there a reason for it or an argument that supports it. 

[60] It is therefore evident from all that we have shown that the eye senses 
the light and colour that are in the surface of a visible object only through the 
form of that light and colour, which [form] extends from the object to the eye 

105a in the intermediate transparent body; | and that the eye does not perceive any 
of the forms reaching it except through the straight lines which are imagined 
to extend between the visible object and the centre of the eye and which are 
perpendicular to all surfaces of the coats of the eye. And that is what we 
wished to prove. 

[61] That, then, is the manner of vision in general. For that which sight 
perceives of a visible object by pure sensation is only the light and colour in 
that object. As for the other properties that sight perceives of a visible object, 
such as shape, position, size, movement, and the like, these sight cannot 
perceive by pure sensation, but only by inference and signs. 1 We shall 
afterwards explain this thoroughly in the second Book when we enumerate 
the properties perceptible by sight. But that which we have shown, I mean the 
manner of vision, accords with the view of the learned among physicists and 
with the generally accepted view of mathematicians. It is now clear from 
[what we have shown] that the two groups are right and the two doctrines 
correct, mutually compatible and not contradictory. But neither [doctrine] is 
complete without the other, for sensation cannot be effected by virtue of one 

105b [of these two doctrines] without the other, | nor can vision take place without 
their combination. 

[62] The lines that we have described are what mathematicians call ‘lines of 
the ray’. These are imaginary lines only and through them alone the eye 
perceives the forms of visible objects. For sensation occurs only through the 
form and through the action of the form on the eye and through the eye’s 
being affected as a result of that action. The eye is disposed to be affected by 
these forms, but in a certain perceptible direction which is that of the 
perpendiculars to its surface. For it can only perceive the forms of visible 
objects through the perpendiculars; and the nature of the eye is characterized 
by this property only because visible objects cannot appear to it distinct and 
the parts of each object ordered unless it senses them through these lines alone. 
Thus the radial lines are imaginary lines that determine the direction in which 
the eye is affected by the form. 

[63] It has also been shown that when the eye faces a visible object there is 
formed between the object and the centre of the eye a cone with that centre as 


I. 6 83 

1 1 06a vertex and the surface of the object as base. There is thus between every point | 
on the object’s surface and the centre of the eye an imaginary straight line 
perpendicular to the surfaces of the eye’s coats; the cone comprising these lines 
will be cut by the surface of the crystalline’s surface since the centre of the eye, 
i.e. the cone’s vertex, lies behind the crystalline’s surface. Now the air 
between the eye and the object being continuous, the form will extend from 
the object along this cone through the air contained in it and through the 
transparent coats of the eye to that part of the crystalline’s surface that is cut off 
by the cone. The cone will comprise all those straight lines between the eye 
and the object through which the form of the object is perceived by the eye. 
And the form will have in this cone the same order which it has in the surface 
of the object, and the part of the crystalline’s surface that is cut off by the cone 
will comprise the whole form of the object situated at the base of the cone; and 
the order of the parts of the object’s surface will be maintained in the form 
occurring at this part of the crystalline’s surface by means of these straight 
lines that extend from the object to the eye’s centre, through which the eye 
perceives that form — for each of these lines cuts this part of the crystalline’s 

1 1 06b surface | at a single point only. 

[64] It has also been shown that sensation occurs only through the crystalline. 
Therefore, the eye’s sensation of the light and colour that are in the surface of the 
visible object occurs only through that part of the crystalline’s surface which is 
determined by the cone formed between that object and the centre of the eye. 
And we saw that this humour has some transparency and some density, and for 
this reason it is likened to ice. Thus because it is somewhat transparent it receives 
the forms and these pass through it on account of the transparency that is in it; 
and because it is somewhat dense it resists the forms and hinders them from 
passing through it on account of the density that is in it, and the forms are fixed in 
its surface and its body on account of that density. Similarly with every 
transparent body that is somewhat dense: when it is illuminated, the light passes 
through it according to the transparency that is in it, and the light is fixed in its 
surface according to its density — just as light is fixed in the surfaces of opaque 
bodies. Light is also fixed in the whole of the body which it penetrates on 
account of the density of that body; thus light appears on the surface and in the 
whole of the body in as much as it is fixed in it. 

[65] Further, the crystalline is disposed to receive and sense these forms. 

1 107a The forms thus | traverse it on account of the receptive and also sensitive 

power which is in it and through which it is disposed to have sensation. And 
since it is disposed to receive these forms through the radial lines, the forms 
traverse its body along those lines. 

[66] Thus when the form reaches the surface of the crystalline it acts on the 
crystalline and the crystalline is affected by it, for it is a property of light that it 


84 


Optics 


acts on the eye, and it is a property of the eye to be affected by light. This 
action performed by the light on the crystalline passes through its body along 
the radial lines alone. But when light penetrates the crystalline’s body, colour 
will pass along with it, for the colour is mixed with light. And the crystalline 
receives this action and penetration of the forms of lights and colours because 
it is disposed to be affected by these forms. [Thus] through this action and 
affection the crystalline will sense the effect of the forms of visible objects. 
And from the form that occurs in its surface and penetrates its entire body, the 
crystalline will sense the agent, and from the order of the parts of the form on 
its surface and in the whole of its body it will sense the order of the agent’s 
parts. 

: 107b [67] This effect produced by the light in the crystalline | is of the nature of 

pain. But while some pains are such that they disturb the organ suffering the 
pain and perturb the soul, others, being mild, are bearable and neither disturb 
the organ suffering the pain nor perturb the soul. Pains of this description are 
not felt and their subject does not judge them as pains on account of their 
mildness. The proof that the effect of lights in the eye is of the nature of pain is 

| that strong lights disturb the eye and hurt it. Thus the eye feels the pain caused 

by a strong light, such as sunlight, when the beholder gazes at the body of the 
sun itself, or such as the reflection of sunlight from smooth bodies to the eye. 
These lights cause the eye to suffer pain and very much disturb it and the pain 
due to them in the eye is felt. Now the effects of lights in the eye are all of the 
same kind and they vary only by more or less. That being so and the effect of 
strong lights being of the nature of pain, then all effects of lights on the eye are 
of the nature of pain and vary only by more or less. But owing to the mild 
ioSa effect on the eye of weak and moderate lights they are not felt as pain. | The 
crystalline’s sensation of the effects of lights is therefore of the same nature as 
the sensation of pain. But the crystalline is perfectly disposed to be affected by 
lights and colours and to sense them. Consequently, it senses all lights and all 
colours and, because of its delicate sensitivity and perfect disposition, it can 
sense such weak and faint lights as would be hard to imagine that they can hurt 
the eye or produce in it an effect of the nature of pain. 

[68] Now this sensation which takes place at the crystalline extends into the 
hollow nerve and reaches the front of the brain, where the ultimate sensation 
takes place. The last sentient, i.e. the soul’s sensitive faculty, resides in the 
front of the brain. It is this faculty that perceives the sensible objects — the eye 
being only one of the instruments of this faculty. The most that the eye does is 
to receive the forms of visible objects that occur in it and convey them to the 
last sentient; 1 and it is the latter that perceives those forms and, through them, 
perceives the visible properties that are in the visible objects. The form that 
occurs in the surface of the crystalline extends into the crystalline’s body, 2 


I. 6 85 

( IOtS b then through the subtle body in the hollow | of the nerve until it reaches the 
common nerve; when it occurs there vision will be effected, and from the 
form occurring in the common nerve the last sentient 3 will perceive the form 
of the object. 

[69] A beholder, however, perceives visible objects with two eyes. But if 
vision is brought about through the form that occurs in the eye, and the 
beholder perceives the objects with two eyes, then the forms of visible objects 
occur in both eyes, and thus for every object there occur two forms in the eyes. 
Nevertheless, the beholder perceives each object in most cases as one. The 
reason for this is that the single object’s two forms that occur in the eyes when 
the object is perceived as one come together when they reach the common 
nerve and coincide with one another and become one form. And from the 
form thus united from these two forms the last sentient perceives the form of 
the object. 

[70] The [following] is a proof that the two forms produced in the eyes by a 
single object (when it is perceived as one) unite and become one form betore it 
is perceived by the last sentient, and that the latter perceives the torm ot the 

1 ioya object (when perceived as one) | only after the two forms have been united. If 
the beholder puts his hand on one eye and gently but continually presses on 
one side so as to change its position by moving it downwards, upwards or to 
some [other] side, while the other eye remains stationary; and if at the same 
time he looks with both eyes at a visible object on the side opposite that on 
which he pressed, he will see the single object double. That is to say, if he puts 
[his hand] on the upper part of one eye and pressing it down he looks 
downwards, he will see the single object as two. And, similarly, if he puts [his 
hand] on the lower part of one eye and pressing it upwards he looks up, he will 
see the single object as two. If he removes his hand from his eye, and the eye 
returns to its natural position, and he then views that object with both eyes 
directed to it, he will see it single. And this is found to be so when he looks 
with both eyes. But if he presses one eye while covering the other he will only 
see the single object single. 

[71] Now if the sentient perceived the single object as one simply because it 

1 109b is one, then the sentient would | always perceive it as one regardless of the 

varying conditions of the two eyes. And if nothing came to [the sentient] from 
the object, it would not perceive the object. And if two forms always came to 
it from a single object, it would always perceive the single object as two. But if 
the last sentient only perceives visible objects from the forms reaching it, and 
if it perceives a single object in some cases as two and in others as one, then this 
proves that what reaches it when it perceives a single object as two are two 
forms, and that what reaches it when it perceives that object as one is one 


86 


Optics 


form. And if in both cases two forms are produced in the eyes, while that 
which reaches the last sentient is sometimes two forms and sometimes one; 
further, if the forms that reach the last sentient must go to it from the eyes; 
then that which reaches the last sentient from the two forms produced in the 
eyes by the single object (when perceived as one) is a single form. 

[72] But the forms do not reach the last sentient from one eye to the 

n oa exclusion of the other when both eyes are sound | and the object is perceived 

by both. If, therefore, that which comes to the last sentient from each of the 
two forms produced in the eyes by the single object (when perceived as one) is 
one form, and if the forms reach the last sentient from both eyes, then the two 
forms produced in the eyes by the single object (when it is perceived as one) 
extend from the two eyes and meet before the last sentient perceives them, and 
after their meeting and union the last sentient perceives the form united from 
them. Thus the two forms produced in the eyes by a single object when it is 
perceived as two extend from the eyes without meeting and reach the last 
sentient as two. And the two forms produced in the eyes by a single object 
when it is perceived as two extend from the eyes without meeting and reach 
the last sentient as two. And the two forms produced in the eyes by a single 
object when it is perceived as one meet before they reach the last sentient, and 
after their meeting the last sentient perceives, through the form united from 
them, the form of that object. 

[73] Furthermore, the fact that a single visible object is in some cases 
1 nob perceived as one, in others as two, is a proof that vision | is not effected by the 

eye alone. For if it were, the eyes, when perceiving the single object as one, 
would perceive a single form from the two forms produced in them by a single 
object, and they would always perceive a single form from the two forms 
produced in them by the single object. 

[74] But if the visible object is in some cases perceived as one and in others as 
two, while in both cases it has two forms in the eyes, then this proves that there 
exists besides the eye a sentient in which a single form is produced for a single 
object when the latter is perceived as one (in addition to the two forms of that 
object produced in the two eyes) and in which two forms are produced for the 
single object when perceived as two. Thus sensation is effected only by that 
sentient and not by the eye alone. Therefore, the fact that a single object is in 
some cases perceived as one, and in others as two, proves that the forms 
produced in the eye reach the last sentient and that sensation is completed by the 
last sentient and not by the eye alone. It also proves that the two forms of a single 
object perceived as one come together before the last sentient perceives them. 

1 ina | [75] Furthermore, sensation extends from the organs [of sense] to the last 

sentient only through the nerves joining these organs to the brain. And it has 


I. 6 87 

been shown that the forms extend from the eye to the last sentient residing in 
the anterior part of the brain; therefore, the forms extend from the eye 
through the nerve that stretches between the eye and the brain until it reaches 
the last sentient. And since it has been shown that the two forms produced in 
the eyes by a single visible object, when it is perceived as one, extend to the last 
sentient and meet before the last sentient perceives them, and since the 
extension of forms to the last sentient takes place only in the nerves, these two 
forms therefore extend from the eyes through the two nerves stretching from 
the eyes and come together where the two nerves meet. And we have seen in 
[the chapter on] The Structure of the Eye that the two nerves extending from 
the brain to the eyes meet at the front of the brain and become one nerve, after 
which they diverge and eventually reach the eyes. But if the two forms 
extending from the eyes through the two nerves come together where the two 
nerves meet, then the two forms produced in the eyes by a single object (when 

[ mb | the latter is perceived as one) extend from the eyes and reach the common 
nerve where they meet and become one form. But if these two forms reach the 
common nerve, then all forms produced in the eyes by the forms of visible 
objects reach the common nerve. 

[76] The clear proof that the forms of visible objects extending in the cavity 
of the nerve reach the last sentient, and that vision is effected after their 
extension through the nerve, is that when this nerve is obstructed vision 
ceases, and upon removing the obstruction vision returns. That is attested by 
the art of medicine. 

[77] The reason why the two forms meet when a single object is perceived 
as one but not when perceived as two is [the following]. When a single object 
is perceived by the two eyes in their natural position, the eyes will be similarly 
situated with respect to one object whose form thus occurs in two places 
similarly situated with respect to both eyes. When the position of one of the 
eyes is altered then their positions relative to that object will not be the same 

1 112a and the two forms of that object will thus occur | in two positions that differ in 
the two eyes. And we have seen in [the chapter on] The Structure of the Eye 
that the common nerve is similarly situated with respect to the two eyes. That 
being the case, two similarly situated points in the two eyes will have the same 
position with respect to a given point in the common nerve. Thus when the 
two forms extend from the two similarly situated points they come to that 
given point in the common nerve which is similarly situated relative to those 
two points. The two forms will therefore coincide with one another and 
become one form. 

[78] But two points which are differently situated with respect to the eyes 
will not be similarly situated relative to a given point in the common nerve. 
Thus when the two forms extending from the two differently situated points 


i 


88 


Optics 


reach the common nerve they will come to two different points in this nerve 
and not to a single place. They will therefore occur in this nerve as two forms, 
and a single visible object will in this case be perceived as two. 

1 2b | [79] Thus the two nerves that develop out of the anterior part of the brain 

and are the origin of the eyes meet at a place similarly situated relative to both 
eyes, and their cavities become one, only in order that the two forms produced 
in the eyes by a single visible object may be united and become one and the last 
sentient may perceive the single object as one. And thus all forms produced in 
the eyes by the forms of visible objects extend from the eyes through the two 
hollow nerves and arrive at the cavity of the common nerve. The two forms 
produced in the eyes by the single object (when perceived as one) meet in the 
cavity of this nerve and become one form, and from the forms produced in 
this nerve the last sentient perceives the forms of visible objects. 

[80] It might be said that the forms occurring in the eyes do not reach the 
common nerve, but rather the sensation taking place in the eyes extends to the 
common nerve in the same way as the sensation of pain and of tangible objects 
extend, and when the sensation reaches the common nerve the last sentient 

na perceives that sensible object. [It might be said] further that | the sensation 
produced in the eyes by a single object when it is perceived as one reaches a 
given place in the common nerve and thus the two sensations arrive at one 
place in the common nerve, and consequently the last sentient perceives the 
single object as one. Thus what reaches the common nerve is the sensation, 
not the forms. 

[81] We reply that the sensation produced in the eyes no doubt reaches the 
common nerve. But the sensation produced in the eyes is not only a sensation 
of pain, but a sensation of an effect of the nature of pain, and a sensation of 
luminosity, and of colour, and of the order of parts of the object. Now a 
sensation of the difference between colours and of the order of the object’s 
parts is not of the same nature as pain. We shall show later on how the eye’s 
sensation of each of these things occurs. But the sensation of the form of a 
visible object that corresponds with that form can only be produced by the 
sensation of all properties in the form. Further, if the sensation that takes place 

13b in the eye reaches the common nerve, and it is from the sensation produced | in 
the common nerve that the sensitive faculty perceives the form of the visible 
object, then the sensation occurring in the common nerve is a sensation of the 
light and the colour and the order. Thus, in any event, what passes from the 
eye to the common nerve and from which the last sentient perceives the form 
of the object is something from which the last sentient perceives the light and 
colour of the visible object and the order of the object’s parts. But that from 
which the last sentient may perceive light and colour and order is a certain 
form. Thus from the form produced in the eye there comes, in any event, to 


I. 6 89 

the common nerve a certain ordered form. And from the ordered form 
occurring in this nerve the last sentient perceives the form of the object as it is. 
Therefore, the sensation of the effect produced on the surface of the crystalline 
extends to the common nerve, and the form of the light and colour that occurs 
in the surface of the crystalline also extends to the common nerve and it arrives 
there with the disposition it has on the surface of the crystalline unchanged. 

[82] It is therefore clear from all that we have said that vision occurs only 

I Il4a through the forms that extend from the visible objects to the eye; | that these 

forms occurring on the surface of the crystalline humour pass through the 
body of the crystalline; that the crystalline senses the form when it passes 
through it, and the crystalline senses this form along the radial lines alone; that 
the form sensed by the crystalline extends in the sentient body stretching in the 
cavity of the nerve and arrives at the hollow of the common nerve; that all 
forms of visible objects perceived by the eye arrive at the common nerve; that 
vision is effected only by the last sentient’s perception of the forms of visible 
objects; that the last sentient perceives the forms of visible objects only 
through the form that occurs in the common nerve; and that the two forms 
produced by a single object in two similar areas in the eyes come together in 
the common nerve and become one form, and from the single form produced 
in this nerve the last sentient perceives the torm of the visible object. This is the 
explanation of the manner and order of vision. 

[83] Finally it might be said that if the forms of colours and lights extend in 

I I i 4 b air and in transparent bodies | to reach the eye, and if the air and the transparent 

bodies receive all colours and lights; further, if the forms of all colours that are 
simultaneously present extend at the same time in one and the same atmos- 
phere and upon reaching one and the same eye they all pass through the 
transparency of its coats; then it follows that these colours and lights will be 
mixed in the atmosphere and in the transparent bodies and will have reached 
the eye mixed; and they will affect the body of the eye while they are mixed, 
and thus neither the colours of visible objects nor the objects [themselves] will 
be distinguished by the eye. 

[84] We reply that the air and the transparent bodies are not tinged by the 
colours and the lights nor are they permanently altered by them; rather, the 
property of lights and colours is that their forms extend in straight lines, and it 
is a property of the transparent body that it does not prevent the penetration of 
the forms of lights and colours through its transparency. For it receives these 
forms merely as a conveyor and is not altered by them. Now it has been 
shown that the forms of lights and colours extend in the air and in transparent 

1 usa bodies only in straight lines. | That being the case, the form of the light and 
colour in each of the illuminated coloured bodies that are simultaneously 


Optics 


9i 


90 

present in the same atmosphere will extend along the straight lines reaching 
from it into that atmosphere; and the lines along which the different forms 
extend will either be intersecting, parallel or differently situated — each of 
these lines being distinguished by the body from which the form has extended 
along that line. And if it is the case that the atmosphere and the transparent 
bodies are neither tinged by the colours and lights nor permanently affected by 
them, but that the forms merely pass through them, then each of the forms 
extending from different bodies into the same atmosphere will extend on its 
own lines and pass through to the opposite sides without being mixed with 
others. 

/ [85] The proof that lights and colours do not blend in the air or in 

transparent bodies is [the following]. Let several lamps be positioned at 
various points in the same area, all being opposite a single aperture leading to a 
dark place; opposite the aperture let there be a wall in that dark place or let an 

1 >b opaque body be held facing the aperture: the lights of those | lamps will appear 
separately on that wall or body and in the same number as the lamps, each 
light being opposite one of the lamps on the straight line passing through the 
aperture. If one of the lamps is screened, only the light opposite that lamp in 
the dark place will vanish. When the screen is moved away from the lamp, that 
light will return to its place. Whichever lamp is screened, only the light facing 
it in the [dark] place will disappear. When the screen is removed, the light will 
return to its place. 

[86] Now this fact may be easily examined experimentally at any time [in 
the following way]. Let the experimenter employ a chamber with a two-panel 
door in a dark night, and let him bring several lamps which he should set up at 
different points in front of the door. The experimenter should enter the 
chamber, close the door but leave a small gap between the panels, and observe 
the wall opposite the door. On it he will find separate lights, in the same 
number as the lamps, which have entered through the opening at the door, 
each facing one of those lamps. If the experimenter then screens one of the 

16a lamps, the light facing it will vanish; | and upon his lifting the screen, that light 
will return. If he covers the opening at the door, leaving only a small aperture 
facing the lamps, he will again find on the chamber’s wall separate lights in the 
number of those lamps, all according to the magnitude of the aperture. 

[87] Now all the lights that appear in the dark place have reached it through 
the aperture alone, and therefore the lights of all those lamps have come 
together at the aperture, then separated after passing through it. Thus if lights 
blended in the atmosphere, the lights of the lamps meeting at the aperture 
would have mixed in the air at the aperture and in the air preceding it before 
they reached the aperture, and they would have come out so mingled together 
that they would not be subsequently distinguishable. We do not, however. 


I. 6 

find the matter to be so; rather the lights are found to come out separately, each 
being opposite the lamp from which it has arrived. That being the case, the 
lights do not therefore mix in the air, but individually extend on the straight 

1 1 l() b lines by which they are distinguished — the separate lights | thus extending on 
intersecting, parallel or variously situated lines. And although the form of 
each light extends in all the lines that may go from it into that air, these forms 
do not mix in the air nor is the air tinged by them; rather, they simply 
penetrate the transparency of the air while the air retains its form. 

[88] Now it has been shown that the forms of colours always accompany 
the lights and that the two always exist together. Therefore, the forms of 
colours also extend in the air along the straight lines on which the lights 
extend; and the forms of separate colours extend on lines that are intersecting 
or parallel or variously situated (just as in the case of separate lights) and 
accompany the lights; and the forms of colours neither mix nor is the air 
tinged by them, but rather each of the forms of separate and different colours 
is distinguishable by its own lines. 

[89] Again, in the case of all transparent bodies, the forms of lights and 
colours extend through them without being mixed and without these bodies 
being tinged by them. Similarly, the forms of lights and colours that tace the 
eye at the same time pass through the transparent coats of the eye without 
being mixed and without the coats being tinged by them. 

1117a [90] As for the sentient organ, i.e. | the crystalline humour, it does not 

receive the forms of colours and lights in the way they are received by air or 
[other] non-sensitive transparent bodies, but in a manner different from that 
in which transparent bodies receive them. For this organ being disposed to 
sense these forms, it receives them qua sensitive in addition to receiving them 
qua transparent. And it has been shown that the affection produced in it by 
these forms is of the nature of pain, and that the manner in which it receives 
them differs from that in which they are received by non-sensitive transparent 
bodies. But although this organ receives these forms qua sensitive and 
although they affect and hurt it, it is not permanently tinged by them, nor do 
the forms of colours and lights remain in it after it no longer faces those lights 
or they are no longer facing it. 

[91] As an objection to this statement too, I mean that the eye is not tinged 
by the colours and lights, [the following] may be said: we have seen that 
strong lights and bright colours irradiated by strong lights affect the eye; that 
their effects linger in the eye after it no longer faces them; and that the forms of 

1 117b those colours remain in | the eye for an appreciable length of time; we further 
find that whatever the eye perceives under this effect is confused with the 
colours that have affected it. This is a manifest fact which is not subject to 


93 


9 2 Optics 

doubt; but if that is so, then the eye is tinged by the colours and lights; and it 
also follows that moist transparent bodies are tinged by them. 

[92] We reply that this fact itself provides the proof that the eye is not tinged 
by colours and lights and that their effects do not last in the eye. For these 
effects which we have mentioned are produced only through excessiveness, 
i.e. by means of excessive lights or by colours irradiated with extremely 
strong lights. And it is manifest that these effects do not remain in the eye after 
it turns away from their stimuli except for a short time after which they 
vanish. It is also manifest that moderate and faint lights and the effects of 
colours whose lights are moderate or faint do not remain in the eye after it 
turns away from them, not even for a short time. Therefore, the sentient 
organ, i.e. the crystalline, is affected by the lights and colours to the extent of 

:8a being aware of | the stimulus through the effect, after which this effect fades 
away from it when it no longer faces the stimulus. Thus the affection 
produced in the eye by colours and lights is a certain tingeing but it is not 
permanent tingeing. 

[93] Further, the eye is disposed to be affected by the lights and colours and 
to sense them. Thus it is affected by them but their effects do not remain in it. 
Now the air and the transparent bodies outside the eye and the transparent 
coats of the eye preceding the crystalline are not disposed to be affected by 
lights and colours or to sense them; rather they are disposed merely to convey 
the lights and colours. Therefore, the air and the transparent bodies convey 
the forms of lights and colours without being tinged or affected by them, but 
rather always retain their form while they convey the forms that irradiate 
them. And this is true of all transparent bodies and all transparent coats of the 
eye preceding the crystalline. 

[ 94 ] It is therefore clear from what we have said that the eye is not 
permanently tinged by the colours or by the forms of lights, and that the 
effects produced by them in the eye do not last in it, and that the air and the 
transparent bodies and the coats of the eye situated before the crystalline are 

8b not tinged | by the colours or the forms of lights nor are they affected by them, 
but rather they merely convey these forms. It has also been shown that the 
forms of lights and colours are not blended or confused in the atmosphere or in 
the transparent bodies, but rather each of these forms is distinguished by its 
own lines. Thus the forms of all simultaneously present lights and colours 
extend in the atmosphere that is adjacent to them and into all transparent 
bodies facing them along all the straight lines that can be imagined to issue 
from those lights and colours into that atmosphere or into those transparent 
bodies — each of these forms being distinguished by the lines along which it 
extends, and being neither mixed nor confused. These forms will aways be in 
the atmosphere and in all transparent bodies adjacent to, or facing them. And 


I. 6 

because they are in the whole atmosphere, one and the same visible object may 
be simultaneously perceived by several eyes at various points in the atmos- 
phere, each eye perceiving the object through that part of the atmosphere 
which is contained by the cone formed between that object and the centre of 
the eye. And because this form is always in the atmosphere, whenever the eye 

i U91 opens its lids it perceives all visible objects simultaneously facing it. | And 
whenever it moves into some place it perceives the visible objects facing it in 
that place. 

[95] But why do the forms of all colours not appear on all facing bodies, 
while some of them do so only when the colour and the light in that colour 
are strong, and the light in the body on which the form of the colour appears 
is faint, and the colour of that body is pale — this despite the fact that all 
these forms are always extending in the air and radiating on to opposite 
sides? The reason is something that pertains to the eye, and not that these 
forms fail to radiate upon opposite bodies. Rather, each coloured body that 
shines with any light whatever is such that the form of its light and colour 
always radiates upon all opposite bodies that are not excessively distant. In 
the case of lights this is evident. For if an experiment is made with any body 
that shines with any light whatever (provided that the light in it is not very 
feeble) and if the experiment is carried out in the ways we have shown 
before 1 (by holding the body opposite a dark place in which there is a white 

1 119b body, | and the entrance between the dark place and the shining body being 
an aperture or a narrow area) then the light will appear on that [pale] body. 
As for the colours, only those of a particular description will appear, but not 
those of a different description. For it has been shown by induction that the 
forms of colours are always weaker than the colours themselves, and as the 
forms recede from their origin their weakness increases. Similarly, the forms 
of lights are weaker than the lights themselves and they become weaker as 
they travel farther. 

[96] It has also been shown by induction that strong colours situated in dark 
places, when the lights that are on them are feeble, will look dark and 
indistinct to the eye. But when they are in bright places and illuminated by 
strong lights, they become manifest and distinguishable. Similarly, if 
coloured transparent bodies are irradiated by a strong light, their colours will 

1 1 20a appear on bodies opposite them on the other side. If the light is weak, | only 
shadows will appear behind them; the colours will be imperceptible and as 
indistinguishable as colours in obscure or dimly lit places. 

[97] It has also been shown by induction that if the forms of colours that 
appear on the bodies opposite them are irradiated by a strong light, they will 
become invisible, and only appear when the light shining upon them is faint. 


94 


Optics 


95 


[98] It has also been shown that if strong lights reach the eye they hinder it 
from perceiving faintly illuminated objects that face it at that time. 

[99] And it has been shown that the eye perceives a colour only from the 
form coming to it from that colour, and that this perception takes place 
through certain lines. Thus when the beholder looks at an opaque body on 
which the form of a certain colour has shone, he will perceive that form only 
from a secondary form reaching him from it, and this secondary form will be 
weaker than the primary form that is on the body, and the primary form will 
be weaker than the light itself. Therefore, the secondary form reaching 

ob the eye from the primary form will be | much weaker than the light itself. 
Further, the eye will not perceive the opaque body on which the form appears 
unless there is some light in it — either the light that accompanies the form of 
the colour radiating upon it, or that light together with other lights. Thus the 
secondary form that comes to the eye from the primary form of the colour is 
accompanied by the form of the light that is in that opaque body. But the 
opaque body on which the form appears also shines and the eye also perceives 
the colour of that object at the same time. Therefore, the form of that object’s 
colour also reaches the eye together with the secondary form reaching it from 
the form of the colour [that radiates] on the object. Now the form of this 
body’s colour that arrives at this time at the eye is a primary form; and the eye 
can have perception only through specific lines; and the specific line between it 
and the opaque body through which it perceives the form of that body’s 
colour is the same as that through which it perceives the secondary form 
coming from the form of the colour radiating upon the opaque body — for 
that form being in the surface of the body, the eye perceives it through the 

ia lines | between it and the surface, and it perceives the colour of the body 
through those same lines; also, these are the lines through which the eye 
perceives the light that is in the body; therefore, the three forms that come to 
the eye from that body are perceived by the eye through one and the same line. 

[100] But if the eye perceives the three forms through one and the same line, 
then it perceives them mixed together: the secondary form reaching the eye 
from the form of the colour [projected] upon the body facing it will be 
perceived mixed with the form of the colour of that body together with the 
form of the light [in the same body]. The eye will therefore perceive from the 
combination of the two colours a form different from that of each. Now if the 
opaque body on which the form [is projected] has a strong colour, then the 
form of it reaching the eye will be strong. And this is a primary form, and it is 
mixed with the secondary, weak form reaching the eye from the form of the 
colour radiating upon that body. Therefore this [secondary] form will not 
appear to the eye, because when a weak light is mixed with a strong light the 
strong dominates over 1 the weak and the latter fails to be perceived, as is 


I. 6 

, , :I t> always found with ] colours and dyes 2 when mixed together. Therefore, 
bodies with strong colours are such that the forms of the colours radiating 
upon them will not be apparent because these forms will be mixed in the eye 
with the colours of those bodies and because the latter colours will dominate 
over the colours of the forms radiating [or projected] upon those bodies. And 
if the body on which the form [is projected] is white or pale-coloured, and the 
light that is on it is strong, then, as was shown by inspection, the form 
radiating on it will not appear on account of the strength of the light that 
covers it, even though this form [too] is on the body. And the form of a colour 
will not appear when the light [shining] upon it is strong only because its 
secondary form will come to the eye [mixed] with the form of the strong light 
and with the whiteness of the body on which it is. 

[101] It has also been shown that when a strong light reaches the eye it 
hinders the eye from perceiving the weak forms. Thus when a strong light 
reaches the eye together with the whiteness of the body on which this light is, 
it hinders the eye from perceiving the weak secondary form coming along 
with them. 1 And if the body on which the form of the colour [is projected] is 
white, and the light upon it is weak, and the form of the [projected] colour is 

i 1 22 a also weak, or extremely weak, then the form of the light | in that body, though 

weak, may together with the body’s whiteness dominate over the extremely 
weak form of the [projected] colour. Thus when they both reach the eye, this 
[latter] form will not be discerned by the eye. But if the body is white and the 
colour whose form radiates upon it is black or dark, then the form only 
eclipses the whiteness of that body and reduces it, 2 thus [acting] like a shadow; 
the eye will perceive in that body a non-pure whiteness in the same way as it 
perceives a white body in shade, and will not discern the form. 

[102] All this is so when the light in the coloured body is strong and the 
form radiating from it upon the opposite body is bright. 1 But if the light in the 
coloured body is weak, then the form which it casts on the opposite body will 
be dark and will thus appear to the eye like the colours perceived in dark places 
whose light is very weak, and like the colours of transparent bodies whose 

1 1 22b shadows appear behind them when irradiated by weak lights but without | 
their colours appearing in those shadows. Therefore, when the forms of 
colours in coloured bodies illuminated by weak lights radiate upon opposite 
bodies, they are perceived by the eye only as shadows, and their colours 
cannot be discerned by the eye. If the body facing such a colour is in a dark 
place, then nothing will appear on it on account of its darkness and the 
darkness of the form cast upon it. But if the body facing this colour is in an 
illuminated place and there is light on it from something other than that form, 
and if this body is coloured, then its colour will dominate over that form and 
will appear to the eye rather than the form. The form, acting like a shadow, 


Optics 


97 


96 

will only reduce its colour and the eye will not discern this reduction. And if 
the body on which the form [radiates] is white and also illuminated by a light 
other than that of the form, then the form, because of its darkness, will only 
eclipse the whiteness of this body and its light, just as shadows do white 
bodies, and the eye will not discern the form. 

123a [103] If, however, the light in the coloured body is strong and the body | on 

which the form radiates is white and the light on this body is weak, and if the 
radiating form of the colour is strong as compared with the light and 
whiteness of the body on which it radiates, and if the form is of a strong, 
bright colour and the secondary form coming from it to the eye is strong and 
dominant over the form of the body on which it is [cast] and over the light in 
that body, then this form will be perceived by the eye and will be apparent. 
Only forms of this description will be perceived by the eye on bodies facing 
the colours. 

[104] Therefore, the eye will perceive the form of the colour on the body 
facing that colour only if the secondary form reaching the eye from the form 
of the colour is stronger and more dominant 1 than the primary form reaching 
the eye along with it from the light and colour in the body on which the form 
is [cast]. But this situation rarely holds, and that is why the number of these 
forms that appear is small; and only those appear that are due to strong and 
bright colours illuminated by strong lights, and only those forms appear that 
are on pure white or pale-coloured bodies illuminated by lights which are 

123b weak by | comparison with those forms. What is not of this description does 
not appear, and most forms of visible objects are not of this description. 

[105] Similarly, feeble lights do not appear on the bodies facing them 
because if the opposite body is illuminated by some other light the two lights 
will mix and the eye will fail to discern the feeble light. If the body opposite the 
feeble light is dark, the form of that light will not appear on it, because the 
form of the feeble light will be weak and weaker than the light itself, and the 
secondary form reaching the eye from this form and through which the eye 
must perceive the form on the body facing the light will be weaker still than 
this form. Thus if the light is feeble and the body facing it is dark, the form 
[cast] on the body will be very weak and the secondary form reaching the eye 
from it will be extremely weak. But the eye does not perceive extremely weak 

124a lights, nor is it in the power of sense | to perceive what is extremely subtle and 
weak. Therefore, the eye does not perceive the feeble lights [cast] on bodies 
facing them, although it perceives the feeble lights themselves if they are not 
extremely weak. For it perceives the lights themselves through the primary 
form reaching it, and this [form] is stronger than the secondary form coming 
to it from the form that is [cast] on the opposite body, in addition to being 
unmixed with another form. 


I. 6 

[106] Therefore the forms of all shining colours and the forms of all lights 
radiate upon the bodies facing them, and they do so always. Most of them do 
not, however, appear to the eye for the reasons that we have mentioned, while 
some of them appear if they are of the descriptions we have given. Thus is 
shown the reason why the eye does not perceive the forms of all the colours of 
coloured bodies [that are projected] on all the bodies facing them, but 
perceives [only] some of them, although it perceives all the colours that are in 
the coloured bodies. The reason is that it perceives the colours in coloured 

1 124b bodies from the primary forms that reach it | from them, and these are 
stronger than the secondary forms that reach it from the forms of their colours 
as they appear on the opposite bodies. The eye may also perceive the forms of 
colours singly and unmixed, and may perceive the secondary form that comes 
to it from the forms of the colours of bodies mixed with other forms. 

[107] That is the matter which we promised at the end of the third chapter to 
explain in the present chapter. From which it is manifest that the eye perceives 
the colours of visible objects mixed with the forms of the lights in those 
objects and with all the forms radiating upon them from the colours of 
opposite bodies. And if the transparent body between the objects and the eye 
is somewhat dense, its colour too will be mixed with the colours of those 
objects. The eye does not perceive any colour singly and in isolation from 
some form mixed with it. But the forms that radiate upon bodies opposite the 
coloured bodies are in most cases extremely weak and delicate and the 
secondary form reaching the eye from each of these is in most cases extremely 
weak. Therefore, in the majority of cases, the colours of the bodies themselves 

1 125a dominate over the form | radiating upon them and so the eye will not discern 
the radiating form. Similarly, if the intervening transparent body between the 
eye and the visible object is a little dense, the eye will not distinguish its colour 
from the accompanying colour of the object — given that the accompanying 
colour of the object is stronger and predominant. 

[108] But the reason why strong lights hinder the eye from perceiving some 
visible objects, and why some of the properties of visible objects may not 
appear, is that the forms reaching the eye along one and the same line are 
perceived only as mixed. Thus if some of the mixed forms are excessively 
strong while others are weak, the strong forms will dominate over the weak 
and the latter will not be discerned or perceived by the eye. But if the mixed 
forms are similar in strength, the eye will perceive each of them, and this 
perception of each of the mixed forms will be according to the forms that are 

1 125b mixed with it. For each of the mixed forms | is not singly but mixedly 
perceived by the eye. 

[109] Now the stars are not perceptible in daylight only because the light of 
the sun that exists in the air is stronger than the light of the stars. Thus when 


Optics 


99 


98 

one looks into the sky in daylight, the atmosphere that is between him and the 
sky will be radiant with the sun’s light and will be in contact with the eye, and the 
stars will be behind that light. Therefore, the form of the star and the form of the 
light in the intermediate atmosphere between the eye and that star will reach the 
eye along one and the same line, and will consequently be perceived as mixed. 
But the form of the light coming from the intermediate air between the eye and 
the star — which is a secondary light — will be much stronger than the form of 
the light of the star. Therefore, the form of the light of the air will dominate over 
the form of the star’s light and consequently the form of the star will not be 
discerned by the eye. Again, there will be no perceptible difference between the 
form of the light occurring in the part of the eye on the line drawn from the star 
26a and the form of the light occurring in the other, surrounding parts of the eye, | 
because the form of daylight dominates over the form of the star’s light and 
because the latter form is at the moment of perception flooded by the former. 
Therefore the eye does not perceive the stars in daylight. 

[no] So it is also with feeble lights in the midst of strong lights, as in the case 
of a weak fire in sunlight or the animal called ‘firefly’ when perceived in 
daylight, and other things of this sort. For when these visible objects are in the 
sun’s light or in daylight these lights will irradiate them and the intervening air 
between them and the eye. Their forms will therefore reach the eye mixed with 
the form of the strong light that irradiates them together with the form of the 
strong light irradiating the intermediate air. Consequently the eye will perceive 
the form of visible things in this case as mixed with the form of a strong light. 
But their forms being weak, and the form of the strong light being dominant 
26b over their weak forms, | the latter will not be discerned or perceived by the eye. 

[in] Faint lights and the forms of faintly illuminated objects may cease to 
be apparent when the eye receives a strong light, even if the two forms [of the 
faint and strong lights] do not reach the eye along one and the same line. This 
happens when the two forms pass along two neighbouring lines and occur in 
the two eyes at two neighbouring parts. It can be seen at night in the light of 
fire. For if the eye perceives a nearby fire whose light is strong, while facing the 
eye at that time there exist visible objects that faintly shine with accidental 
light, then, assuming these objects to be farther from the eye than the fire and 
on lines close to the line of the fire, the eye will not clearly perceive those 
objects. If these objects have minute features or parts, the eye will not perceive 
them while in this situation. But if the observer screens the fire from his eyes 
or moves away from the line of the fire so that the line through which those 
27a objects are perceived | recedes from that on which the fire is perceived, then he 
will perceive those objects more clearly than he did in the former case. 

[112] The reason is that the forms of visible objects that shine with a faint 
accidental light are dark. Thus if the eye perceives them without perceiving at 


I. 6 

the same time a strong light, it will perceive the faint light within itself because 
of the darkness inside the eye or the absence of a strong light in that part of the 
eye where the form of the faint light occurs and in the surrounding parts, and 
because of the contrast between the darkness and the light adjacent to it. If the 
eye senses the light in the form, it will discern that form and will have a certain 
perception of it according to the light that is in it. And if it perceives the dark 
form while perceiving with it at the same time a strong light in the part of the 
eye adjacent to that in which it perceives the dark form, then the eye will not 
perceive the faint light in the dark form on account of two conditions. Firstly, 
when the strong light occurs in the eye it illuminates the whole interior of the 
1 127b eye. | But if the interior of the eye is illuminated, then that faint light, which 
(despite its faintness) may be perceived because of the darkness in the eye and 
the contrast between that darkness and the light, will not appear in the eye, 
especially if the faint light is very weak in comparison with the strong light 
illuminating the eye. The second condition is the conjunction of the faint and 
strong lights in two neighbouring parts of the eye. For faint light is darkness in 
comparison with strong light. Thus when the dark or faintly lit form is placed 
in the eye next to the form of the strong light, the eye will not perceive the 
light in the dark form because of the two conditions mentioned. But if the eye 
does not perceive the light in the dark form, then it will not perceive anything 
of this form save its darkness. That being so, the eye will not discern the form 
or truly perceive it. 

[113] The inapparentness of the forms of faint lights on account of their 
closeness to strong lights has parallels in colours. Thus if a pure white body is 

1 128a dotted with a dark-coloured paint, 1 by | allowing small drops of the paint to 
fall on it, or if minute designs are made on it with this paint, the paint will look 
black or very dark; its distinctive quality 2 will cease to be apparent and the eye 
will not be able to perceive its true colour. If marks are made with the same 
paint on a pitch-black body, the paint will look white or pale-coloured; its 
darkness will not be apparent and the eye will fail to perceive its true colour. If, 
however, this paint is placed in the midst of bodies that are not extremely 
white or extremely black, its colour will appear as it is and the eye will 
perceive its true colour in so far as it can be perceived by sight. 

[114] Similarly, if designs are made with fresh-green paint on a dark-blue 
body, the paint will look [-red] and of a clear colour; but if designs are 
made with the same paint on a clear-yellow body, the paint will look 
misannt[- green] and of a dark colour. And similarly with all paints that are 
intermediate between two extremes. 1 

[115] Therefore, when the colours and lights of neighbouring objects are 
excessively in contrast with one another in respect of strength and weakness, 
the true nature of the weak among them will not be apparent or perceived by 


ioo Optics 

128b the eye | next to those that are strong and contrasting. For the qualities oflights 
and colours are perceived by the eye only by comparing them with one 
another. Strong lights hinder the eye from perceiving objects whose lights are 
weak because the forms of the weak lights mix with those of the strong lights 
and in these mixtures the forms of the strong become dominant over those of 
the weak; or because the weak lights are close to the strong, and [because] the 
eye perceives contiguous and homogeneous forms by comparing them with 
one another and [because] the sense[-faculty] is unable to perceive what is 
very weak in comparison with a strongly sensible object. 

[116] We have now explained all matters relating to this chapter. 

CHAPTER 7 

ON THE UTILITIES OF THE INSTRUMENTS OF SIGHT 

[1] The coats of the eye which we mentioned and described in [the chapter 
on] The Structure of the Eye are the instruments of sight by means of which it 

| achieves vision. It is through the structure and relative positions of these coats 

that the forms of visible objects complete their journey into the eye. 

129a [2] The first coat, namely the surface of the eye called cornea , | is a firm and 

transparent coat fitted over the aperture in the front of the uvea. The first of its 
utilities is that it covers the hole in the uvea, thus controlling the albugineous 
humour so as to contain it and prevent it from spreading out. It is transparent 
in order that the forms oflights and colours may pass through it to the interior 
of the eye; for the forms oflights and colours only pass through transparent 
bodies and only these receive and convey them. It is firm so that it may not be 
quickly corrupted; for it is exposed to the air and its firmness provides 
protection for it from such minute harmful bodies as motes, dust, smoke, 
specks, and the like. These, then, are the utilities of this coat. 

[3] The albugineous humour is transparent and also moist and fluid. It is 
transparent in order that the forms may pass through it and reach the 
crystalline humour through which sensation occurs. It is moist so that it may 
always keep the crystalline humour moist and help it to preserve its form. For 

129b this | humour, i.e. the crystalline, is so delicate and the membrane covering it 
is so thin that a little dryness would corrupt it and change its form. [Therefore] 
the albugineous humour is moist and fluid so that it may always keep the 
crystalline moist and help it to preserve its moisture. 

[4] As for the black coat surrounding the albugineous humour, called uvea , 
it is black and thick and somewhat firm; it is spherical and has in its front a 
circular aperture (as we described in [the chapter on] The Structure of the 
Eye). 1 It is black in order to darken the albugineous and crystalline humours 


I. 7 101 

so that, because of this darkness, the forms of weak and inapparent lights may 
appear in them. For the forms of very weak lights appear to the eye when they 
are in dark places, but not when they are in illuminated places. Thus the 
blackness of the uvea is for darkening the interior of the eye so that the 
crystalline may sense the forms oflights reaching the cavity of the eye, even 
when they are weak and scanty. This coat is also thick and somewhat 

1 l3 oa firm in order to control and preserve the albugineous humour, not allowing | 
anything of it to seep outside it and thus keeping it undiminished. The 
thickness [of this coat] further darkens its interior. If it were thin the white of 
the conjunctiva would show through from behind it, 2 but its thickness 
intensifies the darkness inside it. It is spherical because the sphere is the most 
balanced of solid figures and also the most secure from change; for change 
soon affects the corners of an angular figure, in contrast to a sphere. As for the 
aperture in the front of the uvea, it is for allowing the forms to enter into the 
cavity of the eye; it is circular because circularity is equable and because the 
circular is the widest of the figures of equal periphery. 3 

[5] The crystalline humour combines qualities in virtue of which sensation is 
effected. For it is moist and also delicate and it has some transparency and 
some density in it; upon it there is an extremely light membrane. 1 The figure 
of its surface consists of two different spherical surfaces, the anterior surface 
being of larger curvature than the other. It is moist so that it may be easily 

1 130b affected by lights because of this humidity, and the forms reaching it may j 
quickly influence it. It is delicate so that it may be of subtle sensitivity and may 
thus be able to sense subtle and weak forms — for delicate bodies are of subtle 
sensitivity. It is transparent in order to receive the forms oflights and colours 
and be penetrated by them. It is [somewhat] dense and not extremely 
transparent in order to resist the forms oflights and colours reaching it and by 
virtue of its density impede their penetration. Thus the forms produce their 
effect in it as a result of being resisted by it and as a result of the light being 
fixed in it, and the form of the light and colour that is fixed in it becomes 
apparent to the sensitive faculty. If it were extremely transparent, the forms 
would pass through it without being fixed in it. But if the forms were not fixed 
in this humour, it would not sense any of them either in its surface or in its 
body, nor would the forms produce in it an effect of the nature of pain, 2 nor 
would the forms appear to it or be perceived by it. 

[6] The membrane covering this humour is for controlling it so that its 
humidity will not spread out. This membrane is also for giving it shape and 

* nra for preserving its shape; for humours, unless they are contained, | would 
spread out and lose their shape. Besides, humours do not assume a spherical 
shape unless they are contained in a spherical container. Therefore, the 
membrane encloses this humour only to control it and give it its spherical 


102 


Optics 


103 


1 131b 


1 132a 


shape. And this membrane is light, indeed extremely light, so that it may not 
screen [the crystalline] from the forms reaching it. [The crystalline] is 
spherical because the spherical shape is equable and resistant to change. Its 
anterior surface is part of a greater sphere so that this surface may be parallel to 
the anterior surface of the eye and so that the centres of these two surfaces may 
be a single point. 

[7] As for the hollow nerve in which the eyeball is set, it is hollow in order 
that the visual spirit may flow into it from the brain and reach the crystalline so 
that the latter may be continually supplied with the sensitive power; also in 
order that the forms may pass through the nerve’s cavity and through the 
subtle body that exists in it until they reach the last sentient at the anterior part 
of the brain. 

[8] The two hollow nerves at the end of which the eyes are set take their 
origin on either side of the brain’s front so that the position of the eyes relative 
to their origins may be | similar and symmetrical. They do not originate from 
the middle of the brain’s front because this place is reserved for the sense of 
smell. For these two reasons, therefore, the two nerves have their origin on 
either side of the brain’s front. 

[9] The eyes are two and notone because of the mercy of the Artificer, be He 
exalted, and the foresight of nature 1 — so that when one eye is harmed the 
other remains [intact] — and also because they beautify the appearance of the 
face. 

[10] Further, the two hollow nerves meet at the middle of the brain’s front 
and become one hollow nerve, the two cavities becoming one cavity. That is 
so because of what we said in [the chapter on] The Manner of Vision: namely, 
that the same person sees with two eyes. Thus when a beholder looks at a 
single visible object, he senses the form of that object with each of his eyes, and 
thus two forms are produced in the eyes by this object. But if two forms were 
to reach the last sentient, it would perceive the single object double. Therefore 
the two nerves meet and become one, and their cavities become one, so that 
the two forms may pass from the eyes to this nerve. The two 
forms thus meet in this nerve | and, when they coincide with one another and 
become one form, the last sentient will perceive the form of a single object 
single. For this reason, therefore, the two nerves meet and become one, and 
the two cavities become one. 

[11] As regards the surfaces of the transparent coats of the eye, these are 
spherical and parallel surfaces, their centre being a single point. They are 
spherical so that perpendiculars to their surfaces may proceed from a single 
point which is their centre, and then diverge, the distance between their 
extremities becoming larger as they recede from the centre. Thus the cone 
extending from the centre to a visible object and containing all perpendiculars 


I- 7 

drawn from that object to the surface of the eye, will cut off a small part of the 
surface of the eye and of the surface of the sentient organ; and this part, despite 
its smallness, will contain the whole form passing from that object to the eye. 
If the surfaces of the coats of the eye were plane, the form of a visible object 
would not reach the eye along perpendiculars [to these surfaces] unless the eye 
was equal to the object. But other than the sphere, there exists no figure such 
1 132b that all | perpendiculars drawn to its surface will meet in a single point so as to 
form cones the extremities [of whose lines] diverge, while the surface on 
which [the perpendiculars] stand is uniformly ordered. 

[12] The surfaces of the eye’s coats are spherical in order that the perpendi- 
culars drawn to them from the visible object may take up a small part of the 
surface of the sentient organ despite the object’s largeness, while this part 
(despite its smallness) contains the whole form of the object (despite its 
largeness), and in order thereby to allow that from the centre of the eye there 
proceed at the same time to many visible objects many cones, each of them 
cutting off a small part of the sentient organ containing the form of the object. 
All these [surfaces] surround a single centre for [the reason] we mentioned 
earlier: namely, in order that perpendiculars drawn from the visible object to 
one of them may be perpendicular to all, and in order that the forms may pass 
through all of them along one and the same line. 

[13] The reason why the eye does not perceive any of the visible objects save 
1133a through these perpendiculars alone is that only by means of these perpendiculars ] 

are the parts of the objects ordered in the surface of the sentient organ and all visible 
objects distinguished. And it has been shown earlier that the form of the object 
cannot be ordered on the surface of the sentient organ unless the latter receives the 
forms through these lines alone. For this [reason] the nature of the eye has been 
characterized by this property and naturally disposed not to receive any of the 
forms save through the positions of these lines alone. The characterization of the 
eye by this property is one of the things that show the wisdom of the Artificer, 
great be His glory, the skilfulness of His work, and the successful and skilful 
manner in which nature has arranged the instruments of sight in the disposition 
through which sensation can be achieved and the visible objects distinguished. 

[14] The conjunctiva embraces all these coats. It is somewhat humid but also 
cohesive and of some firmness. It encloses these coats in order to contain, 
preserve and protect them. It is somewhat humid in order that the coats inside it 
may have their positions prepared for them in it, and also in order that the 

1 [33b coats may not quickly become dry | through contact or contiguity. Itiscohesive 

and of some firmness in order to help the coats inside it to preserve their shapes 
and positions, so that these shapes and positions may not change. It is white in 
order to brighten the form of the face and beautify its appearance. 

[15] The eyeball is rounded because roundness is the most balanced of shapes 
and also the easiest to move. But the eye needs to move, and to move quickly, 


Optics 


105 


104 

in order to face — through movement — many visible objects at the same time 
and from one position of the person to whom it belongs, and in order to 
confront — through movement — all parts of the object with the middle of the 
seeing [organ] and thereby perceive it clearly and uniformly. For sensation 
through the middle of the sentient organ is clearer than sensation through its 
remaining [parts]. (We shall explain this matter later on in a more appropriate 
place.) 1 But the quick movement of the eye and the need of the eye to move 
quickly is in order that it may — through quick movement — contemplate all 
parts of the visible object and all visible objects facing it in the least time. 

[16] The eyelids | are made to protect the eye and guard it against damage, 
shelter it in sleep, protect it from harmful objects, and give it a rest (when they 
are closed on it) from the pains caused by lights and from contact with the air. 
For lights strike and injure it, and if they continue to strike it and do not give it 
rest, it will be corrupted — this is evident when one looks persistently at 
[strong] lights. 1 From this it is manifest that the eye is harmed by continual 
contact with lights. The eye may sometimes also be harmed by the air when the 
latter is dusty or smoky or very cold. The eyelids are therefore made to shelter 
the eye from the lights when it needs shelter, and to protect it against the air and 
keep away from it many harmful things. Then when it needs rest the eyelids 
close upon it, and this may continue for some time, as happens in sleep. The 
eyelids are mobile so that they may open when there is need for seeing and close 
when the need is for closing them. They have a rapid movement so that they 
may quickly close at the approach of objects harmful to the eye. 

[17] The eyelashes are for keeping away from the eye whatever | impurities 
or inapparent harmful objects may approach it, and also for cutting off from 
the eye some of the lights if their intensity distresses it. Thus when the 
beholder is distressed by intense light, he compresses and squeezes his eyes, 
narrowing [the opening] through which he looks. 

[18] The matters we have mentioned are the utilities of the instruments of 
sight. They are subtle matters that show the wisdom and mercy of the exalted 
Artificer and the consummate perfection of His work, the skilful ways of 
nature and the subtlety of her productions. 

CHAPTER 8 

ON THE REASONS FOR THE CONDITIONS WITHOUT 
THE COMBINATION OF WHICH VISION IS NOT EFFECTED 

[1] It has been shown in the foregoing that the eye does not perceive any of 
the visible objects that exist with it in the same atmosphere, and whose 
perception does not involve reflection, unless [the object] combines certain 


I. 8 

conditions. These are: that there is some distance between the object and the 
eye; that the object faces the eye, i.e. that an imaginary straight line exists 
between every point on the perceived surface of the object and a certain point 
on the surface of the eye; that some light exists in the object, either from the 
object itself or from something else; that the object is of a large enough size in 
relation to the eye’s power of sensation; | that the intervening air between the 
object and the surface of the eye is transparent, and that this transparency is 
continuous and uninterupted by any opaque body; that the visible object is 
opaque or has some opacity in it, i.e. either there is no transparency in it or it is 
transparent but of a denser transparency than that of the intermediate air — it 
being the case that any opaque [body], and similarly any transparent body 
with some density in it, must possess colour or something like colour. The eye 
will not perceive a visible object unless the latter combines these six condi- 
tions; if the object lacks one or more of them, the eye will not perceive it. 

[2] Now the eye requires every one of these conditions for a certain reason 
on account of which it cannot achieve vision in the absence of that condition. 

[3] There are two reasons why the eye cannot perceive a visible object 
unless there is some distance between them, and cannot perceive it when in 
contact with it. The first is that the eye cannot perceive a visible object unless 
the latter has some light in it. Now if the object is in contact with the eye, and it 
is not self-luminous, then there will be no light in the surface of the object that 

1 135b faces the eye; | for the body of the object will screen the lights from the eye. As 
for self-luminous objects, they cannot be brought into contact with the eye, 
for these are the stars and fire, none of which can be brought into contact with 
the eye. The second reason is that vision occurs only through that part in the 
middle of the surface of the eye opposite the uveal aperture, there being no 
sensation through the remaining part of the eye’s surface. Now if the visible 
object is brought into contact with the eye, there will coincide with this part of 
the eye only an equal part of the object. Thus if the eye were to perceive the 
object when in contact with it, it would perceive only that part of it that 
touches the part [of its own surface] opposite the aperture, but not the 
remainder of the object. If the object were moved over the surface of the eye, 
or if the eye were moved so as to touch the whole surface of the object with its 
own middle part, the eye would perceive one part of the object after another; it 
would not perceive the first part while perceiving the second, nor would it 
perceive the whole object at once. But if it did not perceive the whole object at 
once, then the form of the object would not be produced in it. Likewise, if 
1 136a behind an opaque body with | an aperture in it there exists a visible object in 
contact with the aperture, the object being larger than the aperture, then the 
eye will perceive of it only that part that coincides with the aperture. If the 
object is moved over the aperture so that the eye may perceive its parts one 


10 6 


Optics 


107 


after another, then there will not be produced in the eye the whole form of the 
object, and the eye will fail to identify the shape of the object. 

[4] Thus if vision occurred by contact, the eye would neither perceive the 
whole of the visible object nor identify its shape and form unless the eye were 
equal to the object or the object were equal to the middle part of the eye’s 
surface from which vision takes place. Nor would the eye be able to perceive a 
multitude of visible objects together at the same time. But if the eye undergoes 
no change, and there is a certain distance between it and the object, it can 
perceive (by means of its small middle part through which sensation occurs) 
the whole object at the same time, large though the object may be, and it can 
perceive a plurality of visible objects together at the same time. Also, if the 
object is at a distance from the eye, it will be possible for light to irradiate the 

1 36b surface of the object that faces the eye. | For these two reasons, therefore, the 
eye cannot perceive any visible object unless there is a certain distance between 
it and the object. 

[5] The [following] is the [reason] why the eye cannot perceive an object 
situated before it in the same atmosphere, unless there is [an uninterrupted] 
straight line between each point on the object and a certain point on the surface 
of that part of the eye through which vision occurs. It has been shown that 
vision takes place only through the form that comes from the object to the eye, 
and that light proceeds from visible objects only on straight lines. For this 
reason, then, the eye cannot perceive the object unless there are [uninterrup- 
ted] straight lines between them. The object ceases to be visible when an 
opaque body cuts all straight lines between them. If the opaque body cuts 
[only] some of the straight lines between the object and the surface of the eye, 
there will disappear that part of the object at the extremities of the lines that 
have been cut by the opaque body. 

[6] The eye cannot perceive an object unless there is some light in the object. 
This is so for one of two reasons. Either it is the case that the forms of the 
colours in the visible objects do not extend in the air unless some light joins the 

i 37 a colour, so that when there is no light in the object the form of its colour | will 
not extend in the air, and so nothing of the object’s colour will reach the eye, 
and the eye will not therefore perceive the unilluminated object because the 
form of its colour will not have reached the eye. Or it is the case that the form 
of the colour extends through the air, even when no light is present, though it 
cannot produce in the eye a sensible effect; but when accompanied by the 
light, the combination of the two will produce [such] an effect in the eye. For it 
is evident that the form of light strikes the eye, producing in it a manifest 
effect, while the form of colour is weak and therefore lacks the strength to 
produce an effect on the eye similar to that of light. Further, the form of the 
colour in the illuminated body is always mingled with the form of light. Thus 


I. 8 

when the form of light arrives from the object at the eye, it affects the latter by 
virtue of its strength and because of the eye’s readiness to be affected by it. The 
eye will thus sense it because of its action. And because it is mingled with the 
form of colour and not separate from it, the eye will not sense the form of light 
except as mixed with the form of colour. And when it senses the mixed form, 1 
then it will sense the colour through the colour of this form, and therefore the 
eye will sense the colour of the object only through the colour mingled with 
1 r 3 ?b the form of the light that comes to it from | [blank page in MS Fatih 3212] | the 

1 Ij8a object. That is why the eye perceives the colour of an object according to the 

light in the object, and why the colours of many visible objects change 
according to variation in the lights shining upon them. And since the form of 
colour cannot produce an effect on the eye unless it is mixed with light, or 
since 2 no form [proceeds] from a colour unless the colour has light in it, the 
eye cannot perceive any visible object unless there is some light in the object. 

[7] The [reason] why the eye cannot perceive a visible object unless the 
object is of a fairly large size is [the following]. It has been shown that the form 
of the object reaches the eye only through the cone whose vertex is the centre 
of the eye and whose base is the surface of the object, and that this cone cuts off 
from the surface of the sentient organ a small part in which the form of the 
object is ordered and from which the sentient [organ] senses the object. Thus if 
the object is extremely small, the cone that is between it and the eye’s centre 
will be extremely narrow and therefore the part which it cuts off from the 
surface of the sentient [organ] will be extremely small, being like a point of no 
magnitude. Now the sentient [organ] senses the form in its surface only if the 
part of its surface in which the form occurs has an appreciable magnitude in 
138b relation to the whole [of this surface]. | Furthermore, the powers of the senses 
are limited. 1 Therefore, if the part of the sentient organ in which the form occurs 
has no appreciable magnitude in relation to the whole sentient organ, the latter 
will not sense the effect produced in that part on account of its smallness . But if it 
does not sense the effect, then it will not perceive the form. Therefore, the object 
that can be perceived by the eye is that which is such that the cone formed 
between it and the centre of the eye cuts off from the surface of the crystalline a 
part having an appreciable magnitude in relation to the whole surface of the 
crystalline. This sensation is not without limit, but [extends only] to the limit 
that the power of sense may reach; and it also varies in [different] eyes according 
to their different powers, for some eyes are more powerful than others. But if 
the cone formed between the object and the centre of the eye cuts off from the 
crystalline’s surface a part that has no appreciable magnitude in relation to the 
whole of that surface, then theeyecannot perceive that object. Forthis [reason], 
therefore, the eye cannot perceive an extremely small object, and only perceives 
that which has a measurable magnitude. 


io 8 


Optics 


109 


[8] The [following] is the [reason] why the eye does not perceive an object 
139a unless the intermediate body between the object and the eye is transparent. | 

Vision takes place only by means of the form that comes from the object to the 
eye. Now the form extends in transparent bodies only, and only these receive 
and convey it. Furthermore, when the object and the eye are in the same 
atmosphere, vision is not effected (when perception is not by way of 
reflection) unless the air is continuous between the eye and the object and the 
straight lines between them are not interrupted by an opaque body — since the 
form does not extend in a uniformly transparent air except on straight lines. 
For this [reason], therefore, the eye cannot perceive an object that exists with it 
in the same air and on the side facing the eye unless the intervening air is of 
uniform and continuous transparency, the straight lines between the object 
and the eye not being interrupted by an opaque body. 

[ 9 ] There are two reasons why the eye cannot perceive the object unless it is 
opaque or has some opacity in it. The first is that an opaque body is coloured, 
and colour gives rise to the form that reaches the eye and from which the eye 

[39b perceives the colour of the object. But an extremely transparent body | has no 
I colour and, therefore, cannot give rise to a form that goes to the eye, and 

^ consequently the eye can have no perception of it. The second reason is that 

the eye cannot perceive an object unless the object is illuminated and a 
secondary form reaches the eye from the light in the object along with the 
form of the colour. Now the light that irradiates a body does not give rise to a 
secondary form unless the light is fixed in that body and is prevented by it 
from passing through, thereby giving rise to the secondary form. But the light 
irradiating an extremely transparent body is not fixed in that body or in any 
part of it but only extends through its transparency. Thus if a transparent body 
faces the eye and it is irradiated by light from the side of the eye, the light will 
extend through it and will not be fixed in it or in any part of it. Consequently, 
there will be no light in the surface of the body facing the eye from which a 
form would return to the eye. Similarly, if the light irradiates an extremely 
transparent body from any side whatever, it will pass through it and there will 
[40a not be in its surface or in any part of it a fixed light giving rise to | a secondary 
form that goes to the eye. If the luminous body whose light irradiates the 
transparent body is facing the eye, its light will pass through the transparent 
body and reach the eye without carrying with it anything of the colour of the 
latter; for an extremely transparent body has no colour, and the eye will from 
this position perceive the luminous body whose light has radiated upon the 
transparent body. Thus if a body is extremely transparent, the form will not 
be fixed upon it nor will there arise from it a form that extends through the air 
and reaches the eye — neither a form of light nor of colour. For this [reason], 
therefore, the eye cannot perceive an object that is extremely transparent. If 


I. 8 

the transparency of the body is similar to that of the atmosphere, then, its 
condition being the same as that of the air, the eye will have no perception of 
it, just as it has no perception of the air. Therefore, transparent bodies of a 
transparency not more dense than that of the air cannot be perceived by the 
eye, because no form that may affect the eye emanates from them. The case is 
similar when that which intervenes between the eye and the transparent object 
is a transparent object other than air, provided that the transparency of the 
1 l4 ob object is not more dense than that of | the intervening body. 

[10] If, however, the object is opaque, then it is coloured. And if it is 
irradiated by any light whatever, the light will be fixed in its surface and there 
will arise from its colour and from the irradiating light a form which extends 
through the air and through the transparent bodies and this form will be 
received by the air and by the transparent bodies and conveyed to opposite 
sides. When this form reaches the eye it will have an effect on the eye and the 
latter will thereby sense the object. And if the visible object is of a transparency 
that is more dense than that of air, then it will have a certain colour according to 
its density. And if it is irradiated by light, the latter will be fixed somewhat in its 
surface according to the density that is in the object, but will also pass through it 
according to its transparency, and there will take shape from it in the atmos- 
phere a form according to its colour and according to the light that is fixed in its 
surface. And when this form reaches the eye, it will produce an effect in the eye, 
and the eye will sense that object. For this [reason] , then, the eye cannot perceive 
any visible object unless the object is opaque or has some opacity in it. 

1 141a | [n] We have now shown the reasons on account of which the eye cannot 

perceive any visible object unless the object combines the conditions stated. 
The preceding chapters and the explanations we have given in them are what 
we intended to make manifest in this Book. 

The end of Book I of the Optics 
of al-Hasan ibn al-Hasan. 

[Thus] wrote Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Ja'far 
on Sunday, the middle of Jumada the First, 
the year six and seventy and four hundred, 
on which [day] the copying was finished. 

Praise be to God alone, and His blessings and peace be upon 
the best of His creations, 

Muhammad the prophet, 
and upon his family. 

All of it by the hand of the author’s [son]-in-law. 



BOOK II 

ON THE VISIBLE PROPERTIES 
THEIR CAUSES AND THE MANNER 
OF THEIR PERCEPTION 


In the Name of God the Compassionate and Merciful 


THE SECOND BOOK 
OF THE OPTICS 

OF ABU C A LI AL-HASAN IBN AL-HASAN IBN AL-HAYTHAM 

THE CHAPTERS OF THIS BOOK 
WHICH ARE FOUR 

Chapter i: Preface 

Chapter 2: On distinguishing the lines of the ray 

Chapter 3: On the manner of perceiving each of the particular visible 
properties 

Chapter 4: On distinguishing [the ways in which] sight perceives visible 
objects 


CHAPTER 1 
PREFACE 

[1] It was shown in the First Book how vision in general is effected, that is 
by sight’s sensing of the form of the object’s light and colour in the arrange- 
ment they have in the surface of the object. Sight, however, perceives many 
properties of visible objects apart from light and colour. 

[2] It was also shown in the First Book that vision only occurs along the 
lines of the ray. | But the conditions of these rays vary, and so do the 
conditions of the forms that pass along them to the eye. 

[3] Moreover, sight’s perception of visible objects does not take place in the 
same way at all times and for all objects and in all circumstances; rather, the 
manner in which sight senses the same object from the same distance and the 
same position varies according to the intent of the beholder, his deliberate 
effort to perceive the object and his determination to distinguish its 
properties. 1 2 3 4 

[4] We shall now show in this Book the different conditions of the radial 
lines and distinguish their characteristics; we shall also give a detailed account 
of all properties perceptible to sight, and show the manner in which sight 
perceives each of them, and distinguish the ways in which sight perceives 
visible objects and show how they differ from one another. 


i 14 Optics 

CHAPTER 2 

ON DISTINGUISHING THE LINES OF THE RAY 

[1] It was shown in the First Book that the radial lines through which sight 
perceives visible objects are the straight lines that meet at the centre of the eye. 
And it was shown in [the chapter on] The Structure of the Eye that the sentient 

1 2b organ, i.e. | the crystalline humour, is set at the extremity of the nerve’s cavity 

where the whole eye is mounted, and that the bending of this nerve, when it 
bends, takes place behind the eye’s centre and behind the whole eye at the 
aperture in the bone’s concavity. 

[2] It was also shown that the straight line passing through all centres of the eye’s 
coats extends through the cavity of the nerve, rectilinearly reaching the middle of 
the bend in the nerve’s cavity where the eye is set, and passes through the aperture 
in the uvea’s front. It was shown, too, that the position of this line does not vary in 
relation to the eye as a whole or to the surface of the eye’s coats or to the eye’s parts. 
Thus the straight line that passes through all centres of the eye’s coats always 
extends rectilinearly to the bend in the nerve’s cavity, where the eye is set, 
regardless of whether the eye is in motion or at rest. And since this line passes 
through the centre of the eye and that of the aperture in the uvea’s front, it extends 

1 3 a through the middle of the cone, the | vertex of which is the eye’s centre and which is 

surrounded by the circumference of the aperture in the uvea’s front where the 
forms come to the eye. Let us call this line ‘the axis of the cone’. 

[3] It was also shown in the First Book that the cone formed between the 
visible object and the eye’s centre cuts off from the crystalline’s surface a part 
which contains the whole form of the object at the base of that cone; and that 
the form is ordered in this part of the crystalline’s surface by means of the 
radial lines extending between the object and the eye’s centre, so as to have the 
same arrangement of parts of the object’s surface; and that the crystalline only 
senses the object and the form that is ordered in this part of its surface. Thus, 
when sight perceives a visible object whose form occurs in that part of the 
crystalline’s surface which is contained by the cone produced between the eye 
and that object, then every point of the form produced in this part of the 
crystalline’s surface will be on the radial line that extends from that point to the 
corresponding point on the object’s surface and on which the form has 

1 3 b rectilinearly arrived at that | point in the crystalline’s surface. If the form of the 

object is at the middle of the crystalline’s surface, then the axis we mentioned 
will be one of the lines along which the forms of points on the object’s surface 
have rectilinearly arrived, and the point on the object’s surface at the extremity 
of this axis will be that whose form has passed along the axis. 

[4] And it was shown in the First Book that the forms which sight perceives 
of visible objects extend through the body of the crystalline and through the 


II. 2 


1 1 5 

cavity of the nerve on which the eye is set, 1 reaching the common nerve at the 
middle of the brain’s front where the last sentient perceives the forms of visible 
objects; and that vision is accomplished only when the form reaches the 
common nerve; and that the forms’ extension from the crystalline’s surface 
through the crystalline’s body takes place along the radial lines alone, since the 
crystalline receives these forms only along the directions of the radial lines. 

[5] Now the last sentient perceives the positions of the object’s parts in 

ii 4 a accordance with their order in the object’s surface. 1 ] And if the relative 

positions of the parts of the form which occurs in the crystalline’s surface are 
the same as those of the parts of the object’s surface; and if the form extends 
through the body of the crystalline and through the cavity of the nerve until it 
reaches the common nerve; and vision is not accomplished until this form has 
reached the common nerve; and the last sentient perceives the object’s form 
only from this form upon its arrival at the common nerve; and, further, if the 
last sentient perceives the positions of the object’s parts unchanged; then 
vision is not accomplished until after the form which occurs in the middle of 
the crystalline has reached the common nerve with the positions of its parts as 
they are on the crystalline’s surface without any change having occurred in 
any of them. 

[6] Now the form cannot reach the common nerve from the crystalline’s 
surface unless it extends through the cavity of the nerve on which the 
crystalline is mounted. If the form does not occur in the cavity of this nerve 

ii 4b with its own | structure, and with the positions of its parts unchanged, then it 

will not be possible for it to extend from the crystalline’s surface to the nerve’s 
cavity along the radial lines with the positions of its parts unchanged. For these 
lines meet at the eye’s centre, and if they rectilinearly extend beyond the centre 
their positions will be reversed, so that those on the right will be on the left and 
vice versa , and the higher ones will be lower and vice versa , as is the case with all 
lines that intersect in a point. If, therefore, the form extends from the 
crystalline’s surface along the lines of the ray, it will come together at the 
centre of sight and the form will thus become one point. Now the centre of 
sight lies in the middle of the whole eye and before the bend in the nerve’s 
cavity. If, therefore, the form extends from the centre as one point along one 
line, it will reach the bend in the nerve’s cavity as one point and there will be no 
form in the nerve’s cavity. And if it extends along the radial lines beyond 
u 5a the centre, | it will be reversed according to the reversal of the intersecting 

lines on which it extended. Thus when it reaches the nerve’s cavity after going 
beyond the centre it will arrive in a reversed position. The form cannot, then, 
reach the nerve’s cavity from the crystalline’s surface with the positions of its 
parts as they are if it extends along the lines of the ray. And, therefore, the 
form can only reach the nerve’s cavity from the crystalline’s surface, with the 


1 16 


Optics 


positions of its parts unchanged, along refracted lines which intersect the lines 
of the ray. 

[7] But if vision is accomplished only when the form which occurs in the 
crystalline’s surface reaches the common nerve with the positions of its parts 
unchanged; and if this form cannot reach the cavity of the nerve with the 
positions of its parts unchanged except by being refracted, then vision is not 
accomplished until after the form which occurs in the crystalline’s surface has 

5b undergone refraction and extended along lines that intersect the radial lines, | 

this refraction having taken place before the form reaches the centre, because if 
it were refracted after passing the centre it would be reversed. 

[8] Now it has been shown that these forms pass through the body of the 
crystalline along the lines of the ray. And if so, and if it cannot reach the nerve’s 
cavity until after it has been refracted along lines that intersect the radial lines, 
then the form will be refracted only after it has passed through the crystalline’s 
body. But the form cannot be refracted in the body of the crystalline when all 
conditions of the latter are as they are. [For] it has been shown in [the chapter on] 
The Structure of the Eye that the crystalline’s body is of varying transparency, 
its posterior part, called vitreous, being of different transparency from the 
anterior part. No part of the crystalline’s body is ofa different form from that of 
its anterior part other than the vitreous body. And it is a property of the forms of 
lights and colours that they are refracted when they meet a body, the trans- 
parency of which differs from that of the first body in which they are. The 

6a forms, | therefore, will only be refracted upon reaching the vitreous humour. 

This body is in fact of a different transparency from the anterior part of the 
crystalline so that the forms may be refracted upon reaching it. 

[9] It follows that the surface of this body must be placed before the centre 
of the eye, so that the forms may be refracted at it before going beyond the 
centre and thus preserve the same structure which they have in the object’s 
surface. And it follows that this surface [of the vitreous] must be similarly 
ordered, because if it were not, the form would be disfigured after being 
refracted at it. Now a similarly ordered surface is either plane or spherical. But 
that surface cannot be part of a sphere whose centre is the eye’s centre, because 
if it were, the lines of the ray would be perpendicular to it and the forms would 
rectilinearly extend upon reaching it and would not be refracted. Nor can it be 
part of a small sphere, otherwise the form would be disfigured once it 

6b extended a little behind it after being refracted at it. This | surface must, 

therefore, be part of a plane surface or part of a fairly large sphere whose 
sphericity does not affect the form’s order, and its centre must not be the 
centre of the eye. 

[10] Thus the surface of the vitreous humour, namely the common section 
between this body and the anterior part of the crystalline’s body, is a similarly 


II. 2 117 

ordered surface which is placed before the eye’s centre. And all forms which 
occur in the crystalline’s surface extend in the crystalline’s body until they 
reach this surface. When they do, they are refracted at it along similarly 
ordered lines that intersect the lines of the ray. For the forms ot visible objects 
are ordered by means of the lines of the ray at the crystalline only, since it is at 
this organ that sensation begins. And it was shown in the First Book that, 
given the largeness of the object and the smallness of the sentient organ, the 
forms of the object cannot be ordered in the surface of the eye except by means 
of these lines. Thus these lines are an instrument of sight through which sight 

ii -i achieves perception of the visible objects as they are, | though the forms need 

not extend along these lines to reach the last sentient, and it has now been 
shown that the forms cannot extend to the last sentient along these lines. 

[11] Moreoever, the reception of forms by the sentient organ is not like 
their reception by transparent bodies; for the sentient organ receives these 
forms and senses them, and the forms penetrate it on account of its transpar- 
ency and the sensitive power which is in it, and therefore it receives these 
forms in the manner proper to sensation, whereas transparent bodies receive 
them only in the manner proper to transmission without sensing them. And if 
the sentient body does not receive these forms in the same way as they are 
received by non-sensitive transparent bodies, then the extension of forms 
through the sentient body does not take place along the lines required by 
transparent bodies; rather, the forms extend in accordance with the extension 
of the parts of the sentient body. Thus the eye is characterized by receiving the 
forms through the lines of the ray alone because it is a property of the forms 

11 7 b that they extend in transparent bodies along all straight lines | and, conse- 

quently, they arrive at the eye along all straight lines; if, therefore, the eye 
received the forms along all the lines on which they arrive, the forms would 
not be [correctly] arranged in the eye. The eye is thus characterized by 
receiving the forms along these [radial] lines alone in order to sense the forms 
in the arrangement they have in the surfaces of visible objects. Then, when the 
forms occur in the sentient organ in their [correct] arrangement, and the 
sentient organ perceives them as [correctly] arranged, nothing remains after- 
wards that cannot be accomplished except by means of these lines. Thus the 
occurrence of the forms in the sentient body is not like their occurrence in 
transparent bodies, for the lines of the ray are merely an instrument by means 
of which the crystalline’s sensation is achieved. 

[12] It was shown, moreover, that the forms cannot extend beyond the 
crystalline along the lines of the ray, but are rather refracted upon leaving the 
crystalline, this refraction taking place upon their arrival at the vitreous 
humour, and that the extension of the forms in this latter body takes place 
along refracted lines and not rectilinearly along the lines of the ray. It follows 


i r 8 


Optics 


that the vitreous body is not especially concerned with the directions of the 
lines of the ray. Thus it is only the anterior part of the crystalline that especially 
n 8a receives | the forms along the lines of the ray. But the posterior part, namely 

the vitreous, and the receptive power in this [latter] body, in addition to 
sensing these forms, are especially concerned only to preserve their arrange- 
ment. That being the case, the manner in which the vitreous receives the 
forms is not like the manner in which the anterior part of the crystalline 
receives them, nor is the receptive power in the vitreous the same as that in the 
anterior part. 

[13] But if the way in which the vitreous receives the light is not the same as 
that in which the anterior part receives it, and if what is required by the 
vitreous is not the same as the crystalline’s requirement, then the refraction of 
the forms at the surface of the vitreous must be also related to the difference in 
the manner of sensitive reception between these two bodies. The forms are 
therefore refracted at the vitreous on two accounts: one is the difference in 
transparency between these two bodies, and the other is the difference in their 
manner of sensitive reception. 

[14] Now transparency only differs in these two bodies so that the property 

11 sb required | by transparency may agree with the property required by the 

difference in the manner of sensation, so that the form may retain its structure. 
If, however, the transparency of the two bodies were the same, then the form 
would extend into the body of the vitreous along the lines of the ray on 
account of the similarity in transparency, and the form would be refracted on 
account of the difference in the manner of sensation, and after refraction it 
would either be confused because of this, or become double. But if the 
difference in transparency requires that the form should be refracted, and the 
difference in the manner of sensation requires that it suffers that [same] 
refraction, then the form will remain after refraction as one form having the 
same structure. It is for this reason, therefore, that the transparency of the 
vitreous body differs from that of the anterior part of the crystalline. The 
forms thus arrive at the vitreous in the arrangement they have in the surface of 
the visible object. The vitreous receives them and senses what is in them on 
account of its sensitive power. Then the form suffers refraction in this body on 
account of the difference in transparency and on account of the difference in its 
119a manner of sensing the form. Thus the form occurs | in this body with the 

structure it already possessed, and then this sensation and this form extend 
into this body and into the body connected with it until sensation and form 
reach the last sentient with the structure of the form unchanged. Thus the 
extension of sensation and form in the vitreous’ body and in the sentient body 
that fills the cavity of the nerve to the last sentient resembles the extension of 
the sensation of touch and of pain to the last sentient. 1 


II. 2 1 19 

[15] Now the sensation of touch and of pain extends from the organs only 
through the filaments of the nerve and through the spirit extending within 
those filaments. So when the forms of visible objects occur in the body of the 
vitreous humour and are sensed by this organ, the sensation extends from it 
into the sentient body that fills the cavity of the nerve that joins the eye and the 
front of the brain. The form extends, along with the extension of the 
sensation, while preserving the arrangement of its structure and the [relative] 
positions of its parts. For it is in the nature of the sentient body to preserve the 

11 y b arrangement | of these forms. And this arrangement is preserved in the sentient 

body because the parts of this body that receive the parts of the forms, and the 
distribution of the receptive power that exists in the parts of the sentient body, 
are similarly arranged in the vitreous body and throughout the subtle body that 
fills the nerve’s cavity. That being so, when a form arrives at any point on the 
surface of the vitreous, it runs along a continuous line the position of which 
remains unchanged in the nerve’s cavity through which the sentient body 
extends. Thus all the lines on which all points in the form run, will be similarly 
arranged relative to one another; and while these lines bend along with the 
nerve, they keep the same arrangement after as before they bend on account of 
the manner ofsensauon in this body. The form therefore arrives at the common 
nerve with its own structure and with no change in its arrangement. There is no 
other way in which the forms of visible objects can extend to the last sentient, 
for the forms cannot reach the common nerve with their own structure 

11 ioa [unchanged] unless | their extension takes place in this manner. 

[16] Since the forms extend according to this arrangement, the form that 
occurs at any point on the surface of the crystalline will always extend on one 
and the same line to one and the same point in that place in the common nerve 
where the form occurs — because the form that occurs at any point on the 
surface of the crystalline always ends up at one and the same point on the 
surface of the vitreous. From which it follows that from any two points that 
are similarly situated in the eyes, two forms will extend to one and the same 
point in the common nerve. 

[17] It also follows that some transparency exists in the sentient body that 
fills the nerve’s cavity so that the forms of lights and colours would appear in 
it, and also that its transparency must be similar to that of the vitreous humour 
so that the forms may not be refracted at their arrival at the posterior surface of 
the vitreous close to the nerve’s cavity. For if the transparency of these two 
bodies is the same, the forms will not be refracted; and they cannot be 

11 10b refracted at this surface, since it is a spherical surface | that belongs to a small 
sphere; for if the forms were refracted at this surface, they would be disfigured 
once they went a little behind it; and, therefore, the forms cannot be refracted 
at this surface. 


9 


120 


Optics 


121 


[18] Now if the transparency of the sentient body that exists in the nerve’s 
cavity differed from that of the vitreous, this difference would inevitably 
cause the form to be confused. And if the form extends where the sensation 
extends, then the transparency of the sentient body that exists in the nerve’s 
cavity cannot differ from that of the vitreous body. This body does not 
possess transparency in order that the forms may extend through it in the 
directions required by transparency; rather, it has transparency in order that it 
may receive the forms of lights and colours and in order that the forms may 
appear in it. For a body does not receive light and colour nor is it penetrated by 
their forms unless it is transparent or has some transparency in it. And light 
and colour cannot appear in a transparent body unless it has some density in it, 
in addition to its transparency. The same is true of all bodies that are capable of 
receiving lights and colours and in which these may appear; and for this reason 

II i ia the crystalline is neither | extremely transparent nor extremely opaque. 

Therefore, the sentient body that exists in the nerve’s cavity is transparent and 
also has some density in it; the forms go through this body by virtue of what it 
has of transparency, and they appear in it to the sensitive faculty by virtue of 
what it has of density. 1 The last sentient perceives the forms of light and 
colours only through the forms that occur in this body upon their arrival at the 
common nerve, and it perceives light through the illumination that occurs in 
this body. It is in this manner, then, that the forms reach the last sentient and 
are perceived by it. 

[19] Now that it has been shown that forms are refracted at the surface of the 
vitreous, we say that the axis of the radial cone cannot be inclined to this surface, 
but must be perpendicular to it. For if it were inclined, the forms that occur at the 

[I irb crystalline’s surface would, | upon reaching this surface [of the vitreous], have a 
different order and an altered structure. The forms cannot occur in the surface of 
.the vitreous with their own structure unless the axis of the cone is at right angles 
to this surface. For if the eye so faces a visible object that the axis of the cone falls 
upon the object’s surface, the form of that object will occur in the crystalline’s 
surface with the same order as that of the parts of the object’s surface. Thus the 
form of the point on the object’s surface at the extremity of the axis will occur in 
the point where the axis meets the crystalline’s surface; and the forms of all 
points on the object’s surface that are equidistant from the point at the extremity 
of the axis will occur in those points of the crystalline’s surface that are 
equidistant from the point on the axis. For all points that occur in the 
crystalline’s surface are on the radial lines that extend from the centre of the eye 
to the object’s surface. But the axis of the cone is perpendicular to the 

[i [-a crystalline's surface. Therefore, all plane surfaces that, being drawn from the | 
axis, 1 cut the crystalline’s surface, will be at right angles to it. 


II. 2 

[20] Thus it has been shown that the surface of the vitreous humour is either 
a plane or a spherical surface the centre of which is not the same as that of the 
eye. If, therefore, the radial axis inclines to this surface, and is not perpen- 
dicular to it, then only one plane surface can be drawn from the axis 
perpendicularly to this surface; all other planes that can be drawn from the axis 
will be inclined to it, since this is a property of lines inclined to plane or 
spherical surfaces. Let us then imagine the plane that can be drawn from the 
axis at right angles to the surface of the vitreous so as to extend itself from the 
axis; it will cut the surface of the vitreous and that of the crystalline producing 
in them two common sections. Let us imagine on the section common to this 
plane and the surface of the vitreous two points equidistant from the point in 
ii 12b the vitreous’ surface that lies on the axis. And let us imagine | two lines drawn 
from the centre [of the eye] to these two points; they will lie, together with the 
axis, in the common plane that is perpendicular to the surface of the vitreous, 
since the two points on the common section of the vitreous’ surface and the 
centre-point are all three in this plane; the angles produced between these two 
lines and the axis will be equal; these two lines will cut the common section 
produced in the surface of the vitreous in two points; and the axis will also cut 
this section in a middle point between the two points on those two lines. If the 
surface of the vitreous humour is plane, then the common section will be a 
straight line. And if the axis inclines to the surface of the vitreous humour, and 
the plane that has produced the common section is perpendicular to this line, 
then the angles on either side of it will be equal. For if the axis were 
1113a perpendicular to this common section | it would be perpendicular to the 
surface. Thus if the axis inclines to this line, thus making the angles on either 
side of it unequal, and if the two angles at the centre of the crystalline, i.e. the 
extremity of the axis, are equal, then the two parts of the line which is the 
common section will be unequal, and the two points at their extremes will be 
of unequal distances from the point on this line that lies on the axis. Now these 
two points are those reached by the forms emanating from the two points on 
the crystalline’s surface that are equidistant from the axis, since they lie at the 
ends of the radial lines passing through these two points. And the point in the 
surface of the vitreous that lies on the axis is that reached by the form of the 
point in the crystalline’s surface that lies on the axis, since the forms extend 
from the crystalline’s surface to the surface of the vitreous along the lines of the 
ray. If, therefore, the axis inclines to the surface of the vitreous, and if this 
surface is plane, then the two points of the form produced in the crystalline’s 
11 13b surface, namely those that are equidistant from the point that lies on the axis, | 
and that are in the plane perpendicular to the surface of the vitreous, will upon 
arrival at this surface be unequally distant from the point that arrives along the 
axis. 


122 


Optics 


123 


[21] If the axis inclines to the surface of the vitreous, and this surface is 
plane, then any plane drawn from the axis and cutting the surface of the 
crystalline will produce a common section that contains with the axis two 
unequal angles — - with the exception of one plane only, namely that which 
intersects the plane perpendicular to the surface of the vitreous, for its 
common section will contain with the axis two right angles. The axis will be 
inclined to the common sections of all other planes, for this is a property of 
inclined lines. But if the angles produced between the axis and the common 
section are unequal, and if the angles subtended by the two parts of the 
common section, namely those at the centre of the crystalline’s surface, are 
equal, then the two parts of the common section produced in the surface of the 
vitreous will be | unequal, and the points at the extremities of this common 
section will be unequally distant from the point on the axis, and the parts of the 
common section that lie in the surface of the crystalline will be equal, and the 
points at the extremities of this common section will be equidistant from the 
point that lies on the axis in the crystalline’s surface. That being the case, when 
the form that has occurred in the crystalline’s surface arrives at the surface of 
the vitreous, it will be differently ordered from how it was in the crystalline’s 
surface and in the surface of the object. 

[22] It is also clear that, if the surface of the vitreous is spherical and the axis 
inclines to it, when points in the crystalline’s surface at equal distances from 
the axis arrive at the surface of the vitreous, their distances from the point on 
the axis will be unequal; for if the axis is not perpendicular to the surface of the 
vitreous, and this surface is spherical, then this axis will not pass through the 
centre of the vitreous. | But it passes through the centre of the crystalline’s 
surface. Therefore the lines drawn from the crystalline’s centre to the points 
equidistant trom the point on the axis in the crystalline’s surface will contain 
with the axis equal angles at the crystalline’s centre. And if these lines contain 
equal angles at the crystalline’s centre, and the crystalline’s centre is not the 
same as that of the vitreous, then these lines will cut off unequal arcs from the 
surface of the vitreous. But of the lines that contain equal angles with the axis, 
and that exist with the axis in the same plane, only two will cut off two equal 
arcs from the surface of the vitreous, namely those that exist in the plane that 
cuts the plane perpendicular to the surface of the vitreous. Thus if the axis 
inclines to the surface of the vitreous, the order of the forms that occur in this 
surface will be altered, whether this surface is plane or spherical. 

[23] If, however, the axis is perpendicular to the surface of the vitreous, 
then it will be perpendicular to all common sections; and every two lines 
drawn from the crystalline’s centre (which is a point on the axis) so as to 
contain with the axis two equal angles, will cut off equal segments from the 
common section | in the surface of the vitreous; the two points at the extremes 


II. 2 

of the equal segments of the common section will be equidistant from the 
point on the axis in the surface of the vitreous, whether this surface is plane or 
spherical. In either case, therefore, the form will not arrive at the surface of the 
vitreous with the positions of its parts as they are in the surface of the object 
unless the axis is at right angles to the surface of the vitreous. But the sentient 
senses the form with its proper structure upon reaching it, and it perceives the 
order of the object’s parts as they are in the surface of the object. Therefore the 
form 1 cannot occur in the surface of the vitreous with an altered arrangement 
of its parts; consequently, the axis of the ray cannot be inclined to the surface 
of the vitreous and therefore the radial axis must be perpendicular to that 
surface. And if the axis is at right angles to the surface of the vitreous, then all 
other radial lines will be inclined to this surface, whether it is plane or 
u i 5 b spherical, for they all intersect the axis | at the crystalline’s centre. None of 
these lines will pass through the centre of the surface of the vitreous, if it is 
spherical, except the axis alone, because it is perpendicular to this surface and 
because the centre of the crystalline’s surface is not the same as that of the 
surface of the vitreous. And since it has been shown that the form 1 that occurs 
in the crystalline’s surface does not reach the nerve’s cavity until after it has 
been refracted; and that this refraction takes place at the surface of the vitreous; 
and that the plane is at right angles to this surface; then when the form 1 arrives 
at the surface of the vitreous, all of its points will be refracted, with the 
exception of the point on the axis, which will extend along the axis until it 
reaches the bend in the nerve’s cavity. Thus no part of the form 2 that occurs in 
the crystalline’s surface will rectilinearly extend to the nerve’s cavity except 
the point on the axis; all other points will reach the nerve’s cavity on refracted 
lines. 

[24] If sight perceives an object that faces the middle of the eye, then, the 
axis being inside the radial cone surrounding that object, the form of the 
11 1 6a object | will pass from the object’s surface to the surface of the crystalline along 

the radial lines and the crystalline will sense the form when it occurs on its 
surface; then the form will extend from this surface along the radial lines until 
it reaches the surface of the vitreous. Whereupon, the point on the axis will 
extend from this surface along the axis until it reaches the bend in the nerve’s 
cavity, and all points on the remaining lines will be refracted into lines that 
intersect the radial lines in a symmetrical arrangement until they reach the 
bend in the nerve’s cavity; the form will thus occur in this place in the same 
arrangement as on the crystalline’s surface and on the object’s surface; the 
point in that form that has passed along the axis will have rectilinearly 
extended to this place, all other points in the form 1 having arrived at this place 
along refracted lines. Now refracted forms are not in the same condition as 
those that have extended on straight lines, for they must have been changed 


I2 4 


Optics 


1 somewhat by refraction. It follows from this that the point in the form that 

I i^b occurs in the bend of the nerve’s cavity | after it has extended along the axis 

will be clearer than all other points in the form. 1 

[25] Moreover, of the points that occur in the surface of refraction, those 
nearer the axis will be refracted less, and those farther from it will be refracted 
more; for refraction takes place according to the angles made between the lines 
along which the forms travel and the perpendicular to the surface of 
refraction, so that lines containing smaller angles with the perpendiculars will 
be refracted through smaller angles, whereas lines that contain larger angles 
with the perpendiculars, will be refracted through larger angles. Now of the 
radial lines, those close to the axis are less inclined to the surface of refraction, 
and therefore they contain smaller angles with the perpendiculars to that 
surface; whereas those farther from the axis are more inclined to the surface of 

1 17a refraction, | and therefore contain larger angles with the perpendiculars to the 
surface of refraction. In consequence, points closer to the axis will be refracted 
less than those more remote from it, and the farther the points are from the 
axis the greater their refraction will be. And the forms that are refracted less 
| will be clearer and less confused than the forms that are refracted more. Thus 

of the points in the form 1 that occurs in the bend of the nerve’s cavity, that 
which lies on the axis will be clearer and more distinct than all other points, 
and those that are closer will be clearer than the farther ones. 

[26] Now it is this form 1 that extends to the common nerve and from which 
the last sentient perceives the form of the object. And if this form that occurs in 
the bend of the nerve’s cavity is not uniform in condition, the point in it that 

i i-b has passed along the axis being more clear than all the other points, | and the 
closer among these points being clearer than the more remote ones, then the 
form that occurs in the common nerve, from which the sensitive faculty 
perceives the object’s form, will not be uniform in condition, the point that 
corresponds in it to the point on the axis in the object’s surface being clearer 
than all other points in the form, and the closer among these points being 
clearer than the more remote ones. Thus, of the forms of objects perceived by 
sight, those on the axis will be clearer to the sense and more distinct than those 
at the extremities of other lines of the ray; and those at the extremities of lines 
close to the axis will be clearer than those at the extremities of the more remote 
lines. 

[27J If a survey is made of the conditions of visible objects, and if the 
manner in which sight simultaneously perceives its objects and that in which it 
perceives the parts of one object are discerned, these conditions will be found 
to agree, uniformly and with no variation or contradiction, with the state of 
1 {Sj affairs we have defined. For if the observer | keeps his eyes stationary while 
facing a multitude of objects at the same time, he will find those objects 


II. 2 12s 

opposite the middle of his eye clearer than those lying aside from that middle 
object, and those closer to the middle object will be clearer than those more 
remote from it. Similarly, if the observer looks at an object of large dimen- 
sions, facing that object with the middle of his eye and keeping his eye 
stationary, he will perceive the middle of that object more clearly than he does 
its edges and borders. This state of affairs becomes clearly manifest if many 
individual objects are present which are successively arranged in a line across 
the eye, and if the observer, facing the middle object, looks at it while keeping 
his eyes stationary; for he will have a clear and distinct perception of that 
object, while also perceiving the objects on either side of it, but not with 
perfect clarity; he will sense the objects that are closer to the middle object 

ii iib more clearly than he does j those farther from it. This state of affairs will 
become even clearer if the line on which these objects lie is long, there being a 
fairly large interval between the extreme objects and the middle one; for in the 
case of objects perceived in this manner, the observer, having kept his eye 
stationary, will find an obvious difference between his perception of the 
middle object and that of the extreme ones. 

[28] Then, if the observer moves his eye so that its middle faces an object 
other than that which was facing it, he will have a clear perception of this 
second object, and his perception of the first object will become weaker. If, 
further, he faces one of the extreme objects, fixing his gaze on it, he will 
perceive it more clearly than he did in the first case, the clarity of this 
perception being according to what is allowed by the distance of the object; he 
will also in this case have a weak perception of the middle object despite its 
closeness to him, there being a clearly appreciable difference between his 
perception of the middle object when facing the extreme object and his 

ii 19a perception of that middle object | when facing it. 

[29] Again, if the observer looks at a body of large dimensions, there being 
fairly large distances between its edges and its middle, and, facing the middle 
of that object with the middle of his eye while keeping his eye stationary, he 
examines his perception of that object, he will find his perception of the 
object’s middle to be clearer than his perception of its edges, and will find a 
manifest difference between the two perceptions, and will also find those parts 
of the object closer to the middle to be more clearly visible than those farther 
from it. If he moves his eye so as to face another part of the object, his 
perception of the second part will be clearer than it was in the first case, and his 
perception of the first part will become weaker than it was in the first case. 

[30] It is therefore clear from this experiment that vision through the middle 
of the eye and through the axis we have defined is clearer and more distinct 
than vision through the extremities of the eye and through lines surrounding 
the axis; and that vision through what is closer to the middle and to the axis is 


126 Optics 

clearer than vision through what is farther from the middle and from the axis. 

II 19b It has therefore been shown by induction and reasoning that vision | through 
the axis of the radial cone is clearer than vision through any of the other lines of 
the ray, and that vision through what is closer to the axis is clearer than vision 
through what is farther from it. 

CHAPTER 3 

ON THE MANNER OF PERCEIVING EACH OF 
THE PARTICULAR VISIBLE PROPERTIES 

[1] The sense of sight perceives no visible properties that are not in a body. 

Bodies combine many properties, and there occur 1 in them many properties. 

The sense of sight perceives in bodies many of the properties that inhere or 
occur in them. Now colour is one of the properties that inhere in bodies, and 
light is one of the properties that [either] inhere in bodies or occur in them. 2 
The sense of sight perceives these two properties in bodies and also perceives 
in bodies other properties, such as shape, position, size, motion and others 

H 20a which will be detailed later. Sight also perceives the similarity and | dis- 
similarity of colours and of lights. It perceives, too, the similarity of shapes, 
positions, motions and of all particular properties. And it perceives the 
similarity and dissimilarity of individuals and of species. 

[2] But the sense of sight does not perceive all properties in the same 
manner, nor does it perceive every property by pure sensation. For when the 
sense of sight perceives at the same time two individual objects of similar 
form, its perception is of the two objects and of their similarity. But the 
similarity of the two forms is not the same as the forms themselves or either of 
them. 

[3] If the sense of sight perceives the two objects through the forms !| 

produced by them in the eye, then it perceives the similarity between the two 

objects through the similarity of the forms produced by them in the eye. Now j 

the similarity of the two forms which are produced in the eye is not these j 

forms themselves or either of them. Nor is there produced in the eye a third 
1 20b form | from which the sense perceives the similarity. And since nothing is 

produced in the eye by the two objects other than their forms, then the sense of ' 

sight’s perception of the similarity is not due to a third form proper to that 
similarity. 

[4] Moreover, the similarity of the two forms is their agreement in respect 
of a certain property and the existence of that property in each of them. 
Consequently, the similarity of the two forms can only be perceived by 
comparing one of them with the other and perceiving in each of them that 
property in respect of which they are similar. And since the sense of sight 


II. 3 127 

perceives similarity, and there does not exist in the eye a third form from 
which similarity can be perceived, and similarity is perceptible only by 
comparing the two forms one with the other, then the sense of sight perceives 
the similarity of two forms only by comparing the two forms produced in the 
eye with one another. 

| [5] Similarly, the sense of sight also perceives the difference between the 

two forms by comparing them with one another. 

[6] Therefore, the sense of sight perceives the similarity and difference of 
forms only by comparing the forms produced in the eye with one another. 

[7] That being the case, the sense of sight’s perception of the similarity and 
dissimilarity of forms is not by pure sensation, but rather by comparing the 

ii 21a forms | it perceives by pure sensation. 

[8] Again, when sight perceives two colours of the same kind, of which one 
is stronger than the other, as when one of them is rust-green 1 and the other 
pistachio-green, then the sense will perceive that they are green, and that one 
is greener than the other, thus differentiating between the two greens. That is, 
it will perceive their similarity in respect of greenness and their dissimilarity in 
respect of strength and weakness. It similarly distinguishes between two reds 
or two blues, and between any two colours of the same kind when one of them 
is stronger than the other. 

[9] Now to distinguish between two greens is not the same as the sensation 
of green, for the latter is due to the eye’s becoming green by [the action of] the 
green; and the eye has become green by [the action of] the two greens; and as a 
result of becoming green by [the action of] both greens the sense perceives 
them to be of the same kind. Thus its perception that one of the greens is 
stronger than the other, and that they are of the same kind, is a discernment of 
the coloration that has taken place in the eye, and not a sensation of the 
coloration itself. 

[10] Similarly, when the two colours are of similar strength and of the same 
kind, the sense will perceive them and perceive that they are of the same kind 
and of similar strength. 

11 21b | [11] And it is similarly the case with lights in regard to the sense of sight. 

For the sense of sight perceives the lights and differentiates between strong 
and weak lights and perceives their similarity in strength or weakness. 

[12] Therefore, the sense of sight’s perception of the similarity and dis- 
similarity of colours and lights, and its perception of the similarity and 
dissimilarity of the outlines and structures of the forms of visible objects, is 
not due to mere sensation but to their being discerned and compared with one 
another. 

[13] Again, the sense of sight perceives the transparency of transparent 
objects only by judgement and inference. For the transparency of barely 



128 


Optics 


129 


transparent stones is perceived by sight only after they have been placed 
opposite the light and looked through: if sight perceives the light behind 
them, then it will perceive that they are transparent. In the same way, sight 
will perceive the transparency of any transparent body only after it has 
perceived a body or light behind it, and after the faculty of judgement has 
further perceived that what appears behind the transparent body is other than 
that body. Sight does not perceive transparency unless it perceives what lies 
behind the transparent body, or perceives the penetration of light through it, 
and unless the faculty of judgement | perceives that what appears behind the 
transparent bodv is other than that body. 

[ 14 ] Now perception that what lies behind the transparent body is other 
than that body is not a perception by pure sensation, but rather a perception by 
inference; therefore, transparency is perceived only by inference. 1 That being 
so, perception of transparency is due to judgement and inference. 

[15] Again, written words are perceived only by discerning the forms of 
letters and their composition and by comparing them with those which the 
reader has known beforehand and become familiar with. Similarly, when one 
examines the manner in which many of the visible properties are perceived, 
they will be found to be perceived, not by pure sensation, but only by 
judgement and inference. 

[16] That being so, not everything perceived by the sense of sight is 
perceived by pure sensation; rather, many visible properties are perceived by 
judgement and inference in addition to sensing the visible object’s form, and 
not by pure sensation alone. 

[17] Now sight does not possess the capacity to judge; rather it is the faculty 
of judgement that discriminates those properties. But the discrimination 
performed by the faculty of judgement cannot | take place without the 
mediation of the sense of sight. 

[18] Furthermore, sight recognizes visible objects and it pefceives many of 
them and of the visible properties by recognition. Thus it recognizes a man to 
be a man, and a horse to be a horse and Zayd himself to be Zayd, if it has seen 
them previously and remembers having seen them. Sight also recognizes 
familiar animals, plants, fruits, stones and inert objects which it has previously 
seen, or it has seen their likes. And it recognizes the utensils and things that are 
frequently used and seen, and recognizes all familiar properties existing in the 
visible objects which it frequently sees. 

[19] It is only by recognition that sight perceives what a visible object is. 
And recognition is not perception by pure sensation, since sight does not 
recognize all that it has seen earlier. For when sight perceives an individual 
object which is then taken away for a while, then sees it again without 
remembering having seen it before, sight does not recognize it, but only 


II. 3 

recognizes that which it remembers having seen before. Therefore, if recogni- 

M , u tion were perception by sensation, | sight would in all cases recognize the 
object it sees a second time. But it does not recognize the object it formerly 
saw unless it remembers seeing it a first time and remembers the form it 
perceived in the first instance or instances in which that form was earlier 
repeatedly [presented to it]. Recognition cannot, therefore, take place without 
remembering. 

[20] If recognition without remembering is not possible, then recognition is 
not perception by pure sensation, but rather it is perception through a kind of 
inference. For recognition is perception of the similarity of the two forms, 
namely the form which the sight perceives of the visible object at the time of 
recognition, and the form it perceived of that object or of a similar one in a first 
instance, or in earlier instances if the sight has perceived that object or others 
like it many times. It is for this reason that recognition cannot take place 
without remembering, because if the first form were not present to the 
memory, sight would not perceive the similarity of the two forms, nor would 
it recognize the object. 

11 zxb [21] Now recognition may be | of an individual object or of a species. 

Recognition of an individual object occurs as a result of likening the form of 
the visible object which the sight perceives at the time of recognition to the 
form it has formerly perceived of it. Recognition of a species occurs as a result 
of likening the form of the visible object to that of similar individuals of the 
same species which the sight has formerly perceived. 

[22] Now perception of likeness is perception by inference, because it 
occurs by comparing one of the forms with the other. Recognition is, 
therefore, due to a kind of inference. But this inference is distinct from all 
[other] inferences. For recognition does not occur as a result of inspecting all 
properties in the form, but rather through [perception of] signs. For when 
sight perceives one of the properties in the form, while remembering the first 
form, it recognizes the form. But that is not so with all that is perceived by 
inference, for many such things are perceived only after inspecting all or many 
of the properties of the individual object perceived by inference. 

[23] Similarly, a large number of visible things that are perceptible by 
means of inference are perceived only after inspection of all their features. For 

H when a literate person glances at | the form abjad written on a piece of paper, he 

will immediately perceive it to be abjad [a word denoting the Arabic alphabet] 
because of his recognition of the form. Thus from his perception 1 that the V 
comes first and the ‘d’ last, or from his perception of the configuration of the 
total form, 2 he perceives that it is abjad. Similarly, when he sees the written 
name of Allah, be He exalted, he perceives by recognition, at the moment of 
glancing at it, that it is Allah’s name. And it is so with all well-known written 


130 


Optics 


words which have appeared many times before the eye: a literate person 
immediately perceives what the word is by recognition, without the need to 
inspect the letters in it one by one. The case is different when a literate person 
notices a strange word which he has not come upon beforehand or the like of 
which he has not already read. For he will perceive such a word only after 
inspecting its letters one by one and discerning their meanings; then he will 
perceive the meaning of the word. And similarly with everything perceptible 
by the sense of sight if the latter has not already come upon it. For when sight 
perceives a form which, or the like of which, has not already been presented to 

II 24b it, sight will perceive what this form or thing is, | and also perceive the identity 
of this form or thing, only after inspecting all or many of the features of that 
form or thing and discerning them. 

[24] When sight perceives a form of which it has previously had perception, 
or of forms like it, it will immediately perceive what the form is in con- 
sequence of its perception of some of the features in that form, if it remembers 
its former perception of that form or of those like it. So, that which is 
perceived by recognition is perceived by signs, but not everything perceived 
by inference is perceived by signs. Perception by recognition is distinct from 
all that is perceived by inference if it is not perceived by recognition, and it is 
characterized by quickness because it is perception by signs. Most objects of 
vision are perceived only by recognition, and none of the visible or sensible 
objects, whatever the sense faculty, is perceived to be what it is except by 
recognition. 

[25] Now recognition is not pure sensation. For the sense of sight perceives 
the forms of visible objects from the forms that come to it from the colours 

1125a and lights of those objects. | And its perception of lights qua lights and of 
colours qua colours is by pure sensation. But those properties in the form 
which, or the like of which, it has previously perceived, and which, or the like 
of which, it remembers having perceived, are at once perceived by recog- 
nition from the signs in the form. The faculty ofjudgement then discerns this 
form, 1 thus perceiving from it all properties in it, such as order, outline, 
similarity, dissimilarity, and all properties in the form the perception of which 
is not effected by mere sensation or by recognition. Therefore, among the 
properties that are perceptible by the sense of sight, some are perceived by 
pure sensation, others by recognition, and others still by a judgement and 
inference that exceeds the inferences of recognition. 2 

[26] Moreover, perception of many of the objects of vision that are 
perceived by judgement and inference occurs in an extremely short interval of 
time, and in many cases it is not manifest that perception of them occurs by 
means of judgement and inference because of the speed of the inference 
through which those objects are perceived and the speed of their perception by 


II- 3 131 

inference. For the shape or size of a body, or the transparency of a transparent 

11 25 b body, and such like | properties of visible objects, are in most cases perceived 

extremely quickly, and because of this speed one is not aware of having 
perceived them by inference and judgement. 1 Now the speed with which 
these properties are perceived by inference is due only to the manifestness of 
their premisses and to the fact that the faculty ofjudgement has been much 
accustomed to discern those properties. Thus it happens that the faculty of 
judgement may perceive all properties in a form as soon as that form presents 
itself to it. And when it perceives all of them, they become distinct to it at the 
moment they are perceived. And when all properties in the form become 
distinct to the faculty ofjudgement, the faculty perceives their conclusions at 
the moment they are discerned. 

[27] Similarly, the faculty ofjudgement does not need an appreciable 
interval of time to perceive the conclusions of any syllogisms 1 whose univer- 
sal premisses are manifest and established in the soul, but rather understands 
the conclusion at the moment it understands the premiss. For example, if a 
person of sound judgement hears someone say ‘This thing can write’, he will 
perceive at the moment he understands these words that the thing he has heard 
so described is a man, even if he has not seen that thing, and without hesitation 

11 26u or the passage | of an appreciable interval of time. Now his perception that the 
thing that can write is a man must be due to the universal premiss ‘Every thing 
that can write is a man’. And because this premiss is established in the soul and 
manifest to the faculty ofjudgement, when someone hears the particular 
premiss ‘This thing can write’, he understands at once that that thing is a man. 
Similarly, if someone says ‘How effective this sword is!’, a listener in 
possession ofjudgement will immediately understand that the sword referred 
to is sharp. And his perception that the sword is sharp must be due to the 
universal premiss ‘Every effective sword is sharp’. 

[28] Similarly, the faculty of judgement perceives the conclusions of all 
syllogisms whose premisses are manifest and established in the soul and 
present to the memory, at the moment it hears the particular premiss and in an 
extremely short interval of time, without there being an appreciable time 
between the moment of understanding the particular premiss and that in 
which the faculty ofjudgement perceives the conclusion. The reason for this is 

U 26b that the faculty ofjudgement does not syllogize by ordering and composing | 
and repeating the premisses as in the verbal ordering of a syllogism. For a 
productive syllogism is not verbally a syllogism without the ordering of 
premisses: for example, this thing can write, and every thing that can write is a 
man, therefore this thing is a man. Thus by means of this ordering, the words 
are turned into a syllogism and the conclusion is made to follow. Had the 
words not been ordered in this way, the conclusion would not have been 



132 


133 


Optics 

produced. But such is not the syllogism performed by the faculty of judge- 
ment, for that faculty perceives the conclusion without the need for words or 
for repeating and ordering the premisses, or the need for repeating and 
ordering the words. 

[29] The order of the words that make up the syllogism is but a description 
of the manner in which the faculty ofjudgement perceives the conclusion, but 
the faculty of judgement’s perception of the conclusion needs neither a 
description of that manner nor an ordering of the manner of perception. For 
when the faculty of judgement perceives the particular premiss, while 
remembering the universal premiss, it understands the conclusion at the 
moment of understanding the particular premiss, not in an appreciable 
interval of time, but in the least amount of time, provided that the universal 
premiss | is manifest to the faculty ofjudgement. 

[30] Most of the objects of vision that are perceptible by inference are, 
therefore, perceived extremely quickly. And because of the speed of this 
perception it does not become apparent in most cases that they are perceived 
by inference and discernment; and they are perceived quickly because their 
premisses are manifest and the faculty ofjudgement has become well accus- 
tomed to discerning them. Again, when the objects of vision that are 
perceptible by inference have been repeatedly perceived by inference and the 
faculty of judgement has understood their meanings, then that faculty’s 
perception of them, when they appear before it after their understanding has 
been established, occurs by recognition without the need to inspect all of their 
properties; rather, the faculty ofjudgement perceives them through signs. 
This resulting perception will, therefore, be among those things that are 
perceived by recognition without resuming the discernment, comparison and 
inspection of all properties of those objects. For example, when a strange 
word appears before a literate person who has not seen it or a word like it 
before, he does not perceive it until after he has inspected its letters one by one. 
Then, if the word, after he has perceived and understood it, is taken away 
from him, and he [later] perceives it again, meanwhile remembering | it, he 
will perceive it more quickly the second time than he did at first. Then, if his 
perception of that word is repeated many times, its form will be established in 
his soul, and his later perception of it will be achieved, at first glance, by 
recognition; he will not need to resume discerning it and inspecting all of its 
letters individually, but will perceive it at first glance in the same way as he 
perceives the form of ‘abjacT or [other] words recognized by him. 

[31] The case is similar with all objects of vision that are perceptible by 
inference: when sight has repeatedly perceived them, its perception of them 
turns into a perception by recognition that has no need to resume the inference 
through which it has perceived their truth. 1 And so it is with all things 


II. 3 

perceived by inference if their premisses are manifest and their conclusions 
true. 2 For when the soul has understood the conclusion by means of inference, 
and the truth of this conclusion 3 has settled in the imagination, 4 and this state 
of affairs is then repeated many times in the soul, the conclusion will become 
like a manifest premiss, so that when the proposition occurs to the soul, the 
faculty ofjudgement will assert the conclusion without needing to resume the 
inference. 5 

(i , Sa [32] Now many of the things the truth of which is understood | by the 

faculty of judgement only through inference are thought to be primary 
notions 1 the perception of which is native to the mind, and not [achieved] by 
means of inference. 2 For example, ‘the whole is greater than the part’ is called a 
primary notion. It is thought that the assertion of its truth is due to the intellect 
of its own nature, and not to inference, because it is quickly accepted by the 
understanding and because the faculty ofjudgement does not doubt it at any 
time. But ‘the whole is greater than the part’ is perceived only by means of a 
syllogism, and there is no way to perceive its truth except through a 
syllogism. For the faculty ofjudgement has no way of perceiving that ‘the 
whole is greater than the part’ except after it has understood the meaning of 
‘whole’ and of ‘part’ and ‘greater.’ For unless the faculty ofjudgement under- 
stands the meanings of the parts of an expression, it will not understand the 
meaning of the total expression. Now the meaning of ‘whole’ is totality, and 
‘part’ means some, and that which is ‘greater’ is so in relation to something 
else, and ‘greater’ denotes that which equals another thing in respect of a 
certain part of itself and exceeds the other by the remainder. From the 
coincidence of the meaning of ‘greater’ with that of ‘whole’ in respect of 
excess, it becomes manifest that the whole is greater than the part. Thus from 
the faculty of judgement’s understanding of the meaning of ‘whole’ and of 

1128b ‘part’ and of ‘greater,’ | and from its perception of the identity between the 
meaning of ‘whole’ and of ‘greater’ in respect of excess, it perceives that the 
whole is greater than the part. And if its perception of ‘the whole is greater 
than the part’ occurs only in this way, then that perception occurs only by 
means of inference and is not native to the mind. What is native to the mind is 
only its perception of the identity between the meaning of ‘whole’ and of 
‘greater’ in respect of excess. And that notion is the universal premiss which 
produced the conclusion. And when the mind takes notice of this notion it at 
once grasps the conclusion. ‘The whole is greater than the part’ is, therefore, a 
conclusion of a syllogism in which this notion constitutes the universal 
premiss. 3 

[33] The verbal arrangement of this syllogism is: the whole exceeds the 
part; and everything which exceeds something else is greater than it; there- 
fore, the whole is greater than the part. That is how the syllogism is arranged 


134 


135 


Optics 

in words. The faculty of judgement’s perception of this notion by means of 
syllogism is a result of its perception that the meaning of ‘whole’ and the 
meaning of ‘greater’ agree in respect of excess. And it quickly perceives the 
conclusion because the universal premiss is manifest. Thus the faculty of 
judgement’s perception that the whole is greater than the part is the result of a 
ii 29a syllogism | of which the universal premiss is manifest to it, and it therefore 
perceives the conclusion as soon as the minor premiss ocurs to it and as soon as 
it understands it — the minor premiss being the notion of whole as that which 
exceeds the part. And because the truth of the conclusion of this syllogism is 
established in the mind and [accepted] as correct in the understanding, and 
because of its presence to the memory, it comes about that when the 
proposition occurs the mind accepts it as a result of merely recognizing it 
I without resuming the syllogism. 

[34] Every notion of this kind is called a primary notion. It is thought to be 
perceived by pure intellection without the need for an inference to perceive its 
truth, the reason being that it is perceived immediately 1 at the moment of its 
appearance before the mind. It is immediately 1 perceived by recognition 
because its truth has been established in the soul and because the soul 
remembers it and its truth and because the soul recognizes the proposition at 
the moment of its appearance. The mind therefore immediately 1 accepts such 
notions by recognition; it perceives their truth because their truth has been 
established in the soul; and their truth has been established in the soul by 
means of a syllogism and as a result of discerning their premisses and their 
meanings. 

ii 29b | [35] Thus the faculty ofjudgement perceives the conclusions ofsyllogisms 

whose universal premisses are manifest and established in the soul as soon as it 
understands the particular premiss and in an imperceptible time. Then when 
such a syllogism has been repeated and the truth of the conclusion established 
in the soul, that conclusion becomes like a manifest premiss, and the particular 
premiss becomes as evident as the universal premiss, and it thus comes about 
that when the particular premiss appears before the faculty ofjudgement, the 
latter perceives the conclusion by recognition without recommencing the first 
syllogism through which it [formerly] perceived the conclusion and without 
discerning the manner in which this perception has taken place. It is also in this 
manner that the faculty ofjudgement perceives the majority of notions 
perceptible by inference from visible properties, at the moment of perceiving 
the form and in an imperceptible time. Then, when those properties have been 
repeatedly presented to the sight, and the perception has frequently recurred, 
and understanding of that conclusion has been established in the faculty of 
judgement, then that conclusion will become like a manifest premiss, and the 
130a faculty of judgement’s perception of that | property will be achieved by 


H. 3 

recognition at the moment of presenting that property, and by means of signs, 
without resuming the first inference in which an inspection of all properties in 
the form was made. 1 

[36] Again, in most cases, one does not at the moment of perception 
perceive the manner of perceiving visible properties that are perceived by 
inference or by recognition, because their perception takes place extremely 
quickly and because perceiving the manner of perception can only be achieved 
by a second inference other than that by which vision was achieved. But the 
faculty ofjudgement does not employ this second inference at the moment of 
perceiving an object of vision, nor does it discern the manner in which it 
perceives that object; nor is this discernment in its power, because of the 
quickness of its perception of those objects which it perceives by recognition 
or by an inference whose premisses are evident and settled in the soul. It is 
similarly the case with all things perceived by recognition and all things 
perceived by an inference whose premisses are manifest and settled in the soul, 

ii 30b namely things the perception of which takes place extremely quickly: | the 
manner of their perception does not appear at the moment of perceiving them, 
because the manner of perception can only be perceived by a second inference, 
and the faculty of judgement does not employ this second inference at the 
moment of perceiving those things which are perceived extremely quickly 
and by recognition. It is for this reason that in the case of many true 
propositions which are perceived by recognition and whose truth has been 
originally established by inference that one is not aware of the manner of 
perceiving their truth at the moment of their occurrence, because upon their 
being presented to the faculty ofjudgement the judgement affirms their truth 
by recognition and because their truth has been established in it, so that the 
faculty ofjudgement does not at the moment of recognizing them investigate 
the manner in which their truth has been established in the first place, nor the 
manner of perceiving their truth at the moment of their presentation and 
recognition, nor the time at which their truth was established in it. 

[37] Moreover, the second inference through which the faculty ofjudge- 
ment perceives the manner of perceiving what it perceives is not an inference 
that can be performed extremely quickly; rather it is one that requires further 
contemplation. For perceptions differ, some being achieved by the mind’s 
own nature, others by recognition, and others still by additional discernment 

11 31a and contemplation. | Therefore, to perceive the manner in which perception 
occurs and to realize what kind of perception it is, is possible only by means of 
an inference, and, moreover, an inference that requires additional con- 
templation and discernment, not one which can take place extremely quickly. 
And thus when the faculty ofjudgement perceives something by recognition 
or by an extremely quick inference, it does not perceive the manner of that 


10 



Optics 


137 


136 

perception at the moment of perception. And for this reason the manner of 
perceiving objects of vision whose perception is achieved by inference does 
not in most cases appear at the moment of perceiving them. 

[38] Moreover, it is in the nature of man to judge and to make inferences, 
and thus he always discerns and compares things with one another naturally, 
without effort or the exercise of [deliberate] thought. He is aware of making 
an inference only when he endeavours to infer or is engaged in thought or in 
seeking out premisses. If he does not undertake to infer or engage in thought 
or seek out premisses, he will not be aware of inferring. Thus familiar 
inferences of which the premisses are evident, and which do not require 
undertaking [the process of] inferring are natural to man; for at the moment of 
perceiving their conclusions one is not aware of having perceived them 
a 31b through inference. Clear evidence | that man naturally makes inferences 
without at the same time being aware of making them, and that he perceives 
many things by inference without at the same time being aware that his 
perception of them is due to inference, is furnished by what can be observed in 
children in their early development: for a child in early development and at the 
| beginning of awareness 1 perceives many of those things which a man of 

perfectly [developed] judgement 2 perceives, and many of his acts are due to 
discerning and comparing things with one another. For example, if a child 
who is not extremely young nor of perfectly [developed] judgement 2 is 
shown two things of the same kind, say two rare fruits 3 or garments or such 
things as children like, and is made to choose between them, then, assuming 
that one of them is beautiful in appearance and the other ugly, he will choose 
the beautiful and refuse the ugly one, provided that he has [reached] awareness 
and is not extremely young. Again, if he is made to choose between two 
things of the same kind which are both beautiful but of which one is more 
beautiful than the other, he will often choose the more beautiful object, even 
though the other is [also] beautiful, provided that he has [reached] awareness. 

1 32a Now the child’s preference for the beautiful | over the ugly thing can only be 
made by comparing one with the other. His perception of the beauty of that 
which is beautiful and the ugliness of the ugly, and his preference for the 
beautiful over the ugly, and, again, his choice of the more beautiful rather than 
that which is less so (if he makes such a choice) can only take place after he has 
compared the two with one another and after having perceived the form of 
each and the excess in beauty of the more beautiful over the less beautiful. But 
preferring the more beautiful can only be due to the universal premiss ‘What is 
more beautiful is better and what is better is more worthy of choice’. He 
therefore employs this premiss without being aware of doing so. 

[39] Thus if the actions of children are examined many things will be found 
in them that cannot be accomplished without judgement and a certain 


Ik 3 

inference. And if so, children must perform inferences and discernment. Now 
there is no disagreement or doubt regarding the fact that a child does not know 
the meaning of inference or what an inference is, nor is he aware of making an 
inference when he makes one, nor would he understand the meaning of 
inference if it were explained to him. If, therefore, a child makes inferences 
without knowing what an inference is, then the human soul must make 

11,2b inferences by nature; | and it always makes inferences and in most cases 
perceives all sensible and evident things that are perceptible by inference 
without effort or deliberation, nor is one aware at the time of perceiving such 
things that one’s perception is the result of an inference. But the things which 
are in this manner perceived by means of inference are only those evident 
things the premisses of which are extremely manifest and can be perceived by 
a short inference and in the least amount of time. As for those things whose 
premisses are not completely evident and whose inferences require more 
effort, one is often aware at the time of perceiving them that their perception is 
the result of a syllogism, provided that one is of unimpaired judgement and 
knows the meaning of inference. 

[40] Thus it is clear from what we have explained that of the things that are 
perceptible to the sense of sight, some are perceived by pure sensation, others 
by recognition, and others still by a judgement and an inference that goes 
beyond recognition; and that what is perceived by a judgement and inference 
that exceeds recognition will be subject to perception by recognition after it 
has been repeatedly perceived by sight and the understanding of which has 

li 33a been established in the soul; | and that the manner of perceiving the visible 
particular properties does not in most cases become apparent because of the 
speed with which they are perceived and the speed of the inference by means 
of which visible things are in most cases perceived, and because the faculty of 
judgement performs these inferences naturally, employing them not by 
thinking and exertion but by nature and habit. 

[41] Moreover, as time passes, man repeatedly perceives visible objects 
from childhood and early development, until there is no particular visible 
property which sight has not repeatedly perceived. Consequently, all particu- 
lar properties that are perceptible by inference will have become understood to 
the faculty of judgement and established in the soul; and it thus comes about 
that this faculty perceives all particular properties (that are repeatedly presen- 
ted in visible objects) by recognition and habit without needing to resume 
inference for the sake of perceiving any of those repeated properties. 

U 33b [42] Again, the notions of properties 1 ] repeatedly presented in visible 

objects and perceived by discernment and inference become established in the 
soul without one’s being aware of their establishment or of when they are first 
established; for one will have experienced perception and exercised some 


Optics 


i39 


138 

judgement from childhood, especially the judgement through which sensible 
things are perceived; and one therefore will have perceived sensible things by 
judgement and inference, thereby acquiring knowledge of those sensible 
things which, as time passes, are repeatedly presented to us so that their 
notions become established in our soul without our awareness of their being 
established. When, therefore, a particular property which has been perceived 
by judgement and inference and established in our soul as a result of its 
recurrence in visible objects is presented to us, we at once perceive it by 
recognition and without being aware of the manner of perceiving or recog- 
nizing it or of how knowledge of that property has been established in our 
soul. Man has thus perceived all particular properties that are perceptible by 
inference and judgement and are repeated in visible objects in the course of 
time, | and they have been established in the soul, so that each of the particular 
properties has come to have a universal form established in the soul. Conse- 
quently, one perceives these properties in visible objects by recognition and 
habit, without resuming the judgement and inference by which one [for- 
merly] perceived what that property really is, and without perceiving it at the 
moment of perception or perceiving the manner of recognizing it at the 
moment of recognition. The only other things that require a resumption of 
the inference and judgement that goes beyond recognition are those particular 
properties that exist in particular individuals, such as the shape or position or 
magnitude of a given object, or comparing the colour of a given object with 
that of another given object, or comparing a given form with another given 
form, or such-like properties of particular individuals. It is in these ways, 
therefore, that perception of all particular properties of visible objects take 
place. 

[Modes of Perceiving Each of 
the Particular Visible Properties] 

[43] Now that all this has been made clear we begin to show the modes in 
which each of the particular visible properties is perceived and the modes of 
inferences through which the faculty | of judgement apprehends 1 properties 
perceptible to the sense of sight. 

[44] Now the particular properties that can be perceived by the sense of 
sight are many, but they fall in general into twenty-two divisions, namely: 
light, colour, distance, position, solidity, shape, size, separation, continuity, 
number, motion, rest, roughness, smoothness, transparency, opacity, 
shadow, darkness, beauty, ugliness, and the similarity and dissimilarity 
between all the particular properties taken by themselves or between all forms 
composed of the particular properties. 1 These, then, are all the particular 


II. 3 

properties that can be perceived by the sense of sight. All other visible 
properties fall under some of these: such as order, which falls under position; 
or writing and drawing 2 which fall under shape and order; or straightness, 
curvature, convexity or concavity, which are modes of configuration, 3 and 
therefore fall under shape; or being many or few, which fall under number; or 
1135a equality or inequality, which fall under similarity! and dissimilarity; or 
laughing, being joyful or cheerful, or dejectedness or frowning, which sight 
perceives from the configuration of the form of the face 4 and therefore fall 
under shape; or weeping, which is perceived from the configuration of the face 
together with the movement of tears, and therefore falls under shape and 
motion; or wet and dry, which fall under motion and rest, since wetness is 
only perceived by the sense of sight from the fluidity of the wet body and the 
motion of its parts with respect to one another, and dryness is only visible 
from the coherence of the dry body and the absence of fluidity from it. 
Similarly, when all the particular visible properties are discerned with respect 
to the manner of their perception by sight, they will be seen to fall under some 
of the divisions we have mentioned or the properties we have detailed. 

[45] Now all visible properties can be perceived only from the forms 
n 35b produced in the eye by the forms of colours | and lights of the visible objects. 

But it has been shown that the form of the light and colour that exist in the 
surface of a visible object occurs in the surface of the crystalline humour where 
it has the same order which it has in the object’s surface; and that the forms 
extend from that surface and pass through the body of the crystalline and 
through the sentient body that exists in the cavity of the common nerve, while 
preserving throughout their extension the order they have on the crystalline’s 
surface, and thus reach the cavity of the common nerve with their structure 
and order as they are in the surface of the crystalline and in the surface of the 
object; and that the last sentient perceives the forms of visible objects only 
from the forms that occur in the cavity of the common nerve. It has also been 
shown that sensation is accomplished only when the last sentient perceives the 
forms of visible objects. All that being so, it follows that the discernment and 
inference which the faculty of judgement applies to the properties existing in 
the forms of visible objects, and also the recognition of forms and of signs in 
the forms, and all that is perceived by discernment, inference and recognition, 
are due only to the faculty ofjudgement’s discernment of the forms that occur 
11 36 a in the cavity of the common nerve when | the last sentient perceives them, and 
to recognizing the signs which are in the forms and which are perceived in this 
manner. 1 

[46] Furthermore, the sentient body that extends from the surface of the 
sentient organ to the cavity of the common nerve, i.e. the visual spirit, is 
sensitive throughout, for the sensitive power exists in the whole of this body. 1 



1 40 


Optics 


When, therefore, the form extends from the surface of the sentient organ to 
the cavity of the common nerve, every part of the sentient body will sense 
the form. When the form occurs in the cavity of the common nerve, the last 
sentient will perceive it; then discernment and inference will take place. Thus 
the sensitive faculty senses the form of the object through the whole of the 
sentient body that extends from the surface of the sentient organ to the 
cavity of the common nerve, and the faculty of judgement will discern the 
properties in the form when the last sentient perceives the form. In this 
manner, therefore, are the forms of visible objects perceived by the sensitive 
faculty, by the last sentient, and by the faculty of judgement. From this it is 
36b clear that the sensitive faculty senses that place in the sentient organ where | 
the form occurs, because it senses the form at the place in which the form 
occurs. 

[47] It was also shown in the preceding chapter that the form extends from 
every point on the crystalline's surface in one and the same continuous line, 
though refracted and bent, until it reaches a definite point in that place in the 
common nerve where the form occurs. But since the form extends from every 
| point on the crystalline's surface to a definite point in the common nerve, the 

form which occurs in a part of the crystalline's surface will extend from that 
part to a definite part in the common nerve; further, in the case of different 
objects simultaneously perceived by sight, the form of each of them will 
extend to a definite place in the common nerve, and the forms of all these 
objects will occur simultaneously in the common nerve, and the relative order 
of these forms in the common nerve will be the same as that which the 
simultaneously perceived objects themselves have. Thus when sight faces one 
s?a of the visible objects, | the forms of the light and colour in that object will 
occur in the surface of the eye and in the surface of the crystalline and extend 
along those special lines which have been defined earlier, while preserving 
their structure and order, until they reach the cavity of the common nerve; the 
sensitive faculty will perceive these forms when they occur in the body of the 
crystalline and in the whole sentient body; then, when they reach the cavity of 
the common nerve the last sentient will perceive them and the faculty of 
judgement will discern all properties that may be in them. Now the form of 
the coloured object that occurs in the cavity of the common nerve is the form 
of the colour and light in the object with their arrangement in the object's 
surface. And the forms of colour and light reach the cavity of the nerve only 
j because the sentient body that extends in that cavity becomes coloured by the 

j form of the colour and illuminated by the form of the light. The form then 

reaches the cavity of the common nerve, whereupon that part of the sentient 
1 7b body in that cavity | where the form of the object has arrived becomes 

I coloured by the colour of that object and illuminated by its light. If the object 


II. 3 Hi 

is of one colour, then that part of the sentient body will be of one colour; if the 
parts of the object have different colours, then the colours of the parts of that 
portion of the sentient body that is in the cavity of the common nerve will be 
different. The last sentient will thus perceive the object’s colour from the 
coloration which it finds in that part, and will perceive the light in the object 
from the illumination which it finds in that part. Further, the faculty of 
judgement will perceive most of the particular properties in the object by 
discerning the properties in that part, such as the order of parts of the form, the 
configuration 1 of its periphery and of its parts, the difference in the colours, 
positions and arrangements of those parts, their similarity and dissimilarity, 
and the like properties that exist in visible objects. 
ii 38a [48] Again, the light does not travel from the coloured object to the eye | 

unaccompanied by the colour, nor does the form of the colour pass from the 
coloured object to the eye unaccompanied by the light. Neither the form of 
the light nor that of the colour existing in the coloured object can pass except 
as mingled together, and the last sentient can only perceive them as mingled 
together. Nevertheless, the sentient perceives that the visible object is lumi- 
nous and that the light seen in the object is other than the colour and that these 
are two properties. Now this perception is discernment, and discernment 
belongs to the faculty of judgement, not to the sensitive faculty; but this 
notion, though perceived by the faculty of judgement, has settled in the soul 
and thus does not require resumption of discernment and inference at the 
arrival of every form; rather, it has been established in the soul that, for every 
form that is mixed of light and colour, the light in that form is other than its 
colour. Now the faculty ofjudgement's perception that the accidental light in 
a coloured object is other than its colour, is due to the fact that the light on one 
1138b and the same object may vary by increase | or decrease while the object’s 
colour remains the same; and though the radiation of colour varies with the 
lights falling upon it, the colour does not change in kind. Again, the accidental 
light that occurs in the seen object may reach that object from a window or 
door, so that when these are closed the object becomes dark and no light 
lingers in it. Thus from perceiving the variation of lights falling upon visible 
objects, and from perceiving that objects are sometimes luminous and 
sometimes not, the faculty of judgement perceives that the colours in these 
objects are not the same as the lights that supervene upon them. Then, as this 
notion is repeated, it is established in the soul, as a universal, that colours in 
coloured objects are not the same as their lights. Therefore the form which the 
sentient perceives of a coloured object is one which is mixed of the forms of 
the light and colour that are in the object, and therefore it is a coloured light; 
but the faculty of judgement perceives that the colour and the light in that 
11 39a form are not the same. | This perception is due to recognition at the moment 


142 Optics 

when the form reaches the sentient, since it has been established in the soul that 
light and colour are not the same in any form which is mixed of them. 

[Perception of Light and Colour] 

[49] Now, among the properties that belong to the coloured form, the first 
to be perceived by the faculty of judgement is what the colour is. And the 
faculty ofjudgement can only perceive that by recognition, provided that the 
colour existing in the object is a familiar one. Thus the faculty ofjudgement’s 
perception of the quiddity of the colour by recognition is due to the compari- 
son it makes between the form of the colour and the forms it previously 
perceived of the forms of similar colours and to its remembering of those 
forms. For when sight perceives a red colour, it will perceive that it is red only 
because it recognizes it, and this recognition must be due to assimilating the 
colour’s form to those it previously perceived of similar colours. If sight had 
not perceived a red colour before finally perceiving a red colour, it would not 

39b know the final red colour to be red upon perceiving it. If the colour is | a 
familiar one, sight will perceive what it is by recognition; but its quiddity will 
not be perceived if it is a rare colour the like of which sight has not previously 
perceived. But if sight does not perceive the quiddity of the colour or 
recognize it, it will assimilate it to the nearest colour it knows. Therefore, 
colour is originally perceived by pure sensation; when it has been repeatedly 
seen, sight will then perceive what colour it is by recognition. 

[50] Sight also perceives the quiddity of light by recognition. Thus it 
recognizes the light of the sun and differentiates between it and the light of the 
moon or of fire. It also recognizes the light of the moon and of fire. Sight’s 
perception of the quiddity of each one of these lights must therefore be 
achieved by recognition. 

[51] As to how strong or weak the light is, sight perceives that by 
discernment and inference, i.e. by comparing the form of the light at present 
perceived with what it previously perceived of the forms of lights. 

[52] Therefore, that which light perceives by pure sensation is light qua light 
40a and colour qua colour. But nothing of what | is visible, apart from light and 

colour, can be perceived by pure sensation, but only by discernment, infer- 
ence and recognition, in addition to sensation; for all visible properties that are 
perceptible by discernment and inference can be perceived only by discerning 
the properties in the sensed form. Similarly, all perceptions by recognition can 
be achieved only by perceiving the signs in the form that is sensed. Therefore, 
perception of the visible properties that are perceived by discernment, infer- 
ence and recognition comes about together with sensing the form. Thus sight 
perceives the light that exists in the self-luminous body as it is and by itself 
through the sensation itself; it simultaneously perceives, as mixed together, 


II. 3 H3 

the light and colour which are in the coloured body that shines with an 
accidental light; and it perceives them by pure sensation. The sentient 
perceives essential light through the illumination of the sentient body; and it 
perceives colour through the alteration and coloration which the sentient 
body undergoes, in addition to perceiving the luminosity of the sentient body 

11 40b owing to the accidental light j which is mixed with that colour. When, 
therefore, the form of colour occurs in the sentient body, the sentient will 
perceive of that body a coloured light; but when the form of essential light 
occurs in that body the sentient will perceive it as pure light. 1 These are the 
only two properties which sight can perceive by pure sensation. 

[53] We say, moreover, that perception of colour as colour takes place 
before perceiving the quiddity of the colour; I mean that sight perceives colour 
and senses that it is colour, and the beholder who looks at it knows that it is 
colour, before realizing what colour it is. For the eye is coloured at the 
moment when the form occurs in it, and when it is coloured it senses that it is 
coloured, and when it senses that it is coloured it senses the colour. Then, by 
discerning the colour and comparing it with colours known to it, sight 
perceives the quiddity of the colour. Thus perception of colour qua colour 
precedes perception of the quiddity of the colour, the latter perception being 
achieved by recognition. A proof that sight perceives colour qua colour before 

u 4131 perceiving what colour it is, is furnished by visible objects of strong colours, | 
such as dark blue, wine, mi5<a«m~-green, 1 and the like, when they exist in a 
somewhat obscure place. For when sight perceives one of these colours in a 
dim place, it perceives it only as a dark colour, realizing that it is colour, 
without at first discerning what colour it is. If the place is not very dim, sight 
will perceive what the colour is after contemplating it further. And it will 
discern what the colour is if the light in that place becomes stronger. It is 
therefore clear from this experiment that sight perceives colour qua colour 
before perceiving what colour it is. 

[54] Now that which sight perceives of the colour at the beginning of its 
occurrence in the eye is the coloration. But coloration is a sort of darkness, or, 
if the colour is faint, it is like shadow. If the object has different colours, then 
the first thing which sight will perceive of its form is a darkness the parts of 
which vary in respect of strength and weakness, like shadows that vary in 

n 41b respect of strength and weakness. The first thing | that sight perceives of the 
form of colour is, therefore, the alteration or coloration that take place in the 
sentient organ, which is darkness or something like darkness. Then the 
sentient will judge that coloration; and if the object is illuminated, sight will 
discern that colour, thus perceiving its quiddity and ascertaining what colour 
it is, provided it is one of the colours previously perceived. If the colour is one 


144 


Optics 


H5 


f the like of which has been frequently perceived, sight will perceive its quiddity 

in the smallest amount of time, i.e. in the second instant between which and 
the first instant in which it perceived colour qua colour there exists no sensible 
time. If the colour is an uncertain one the like of which sight previously 
perceived a few times only, or if it exists in a dim or faintly illuminated place, 
sight will perceive its quiddity only after a sensible interval of time. If the 
visible object is dark, with only a little light in it, such as objects seen at night 
or before dawn, or objects in very dim places, the sentient will fail to discern 
the colour and only perceive its darkness. It is therefore clear from the 
n 42a perception | of colours in dimly lit places that perceiving colour qua colour 
occurs before perceiving its quiddity; but in the case of bright and familiar 
colours in illuminated places, it does not become clear that perception of the 
quiddity of colour occurs after discernment, subsequent to perceiving colour 
qua colour. 

[55] Unusual colours also furnish proof that sight perceives colour qua 
colour prior to perceiving what colour it is. For when sight perceives an 
unusual colour the like of which it has not previously seen, it perceives it to be 

| colour but without knowing what colour it is, but, upon contemplating it 

further, sight will assimilate it to the closest colours known to it. 

[56] Thus, from experimenting with visible objects such as those we have 
described, it becomes clearly manifest that perception of colour qua colour 
occurs before perceiving what colour it is. It is also manifest from these 
experiments that perception of the quiddity of colour must be achieved by 
discernment and by comparing the colour with colours known to the sight. 
That being the case, the quiddity of colour can be perceived only by 

1142b discernment, inference | and recognition. Similarly, the quiddity of light, and 
how strong or weak it is, can only be perceived by discernment, inference and 
recognition. Therefore, that which sight perceives by pure sensation is colour 
qua colour and light qua light. Nothing else is perceived by pure sensation, and 
all properties other than these two can only be perceived by discernment, 
inference and recognition. The first things that sight perceives of the form are 
light and illuminated colour; anything else is perceived after the perception of 
illuminated colour or of pure light. 

[57] Moreover, we say that perception of the quiddity of colour must take 
place in time. For perception of the quiddity of colour can only be achieved by 
discernment and comparison; but discernment must take time; and, therefore, 
perception of the quiddity of colour must take time. A clear and visible proof 
that perception of the quiddity of colour must take place in time is furnished 
by what can be observed in a revolving 1 top. If the top is painted in different 
colours forming lines that extend from the middle of its visible surface, close 


II. 3 

to its neck, | to the limit of its circumference, then forcefully made to revolve, 
it will turn round with great speed. 2 Looking at it the observer will now see 
one colour that differs from all the colours in it, as if this colour were 
composed of all the colours of those lines; he will neither perceive the lines nor 
their different colours; if the top moves with great speed, he will also perceive 
it as if it were stationary. Now if the top is moving fast, then no point in it will 
remain fixed in any one place for a sensible interval of time but rather traverse, 
in the smallest amount of time, the whole circle on which it moves; the form 
of any point will therefore trace out in the eye the circumference of a circle in 
the smallest amount of time. Sight must therefore perceive the colour of that 
point in the smallest amount of time through the circle produced in the eye, 
and consequently perceive the colour of that point as a circle in the smallest 
amount of time. Likewise, sight will perceive the colour of each one of the 
points in the surface of the top on the whole circumference of the circle on 
u 4j b which the point moves in the smallest amount | of time. But all points at equal 
distances from the centre will move with the top’s rotation on the circumfer- 
ence of a single circle. In consequence of this, the colour of every one of the 
points at equal distances from the centre will appear on the circumference of 
one and the same circle in the smallest amount of time, which is the same as the 
duration of one revolution; therefore, the colours of all those points will 
appear in the whole circumference of that circle as mixed and undiscerned by 
sight; and thus sight will perceive the colour of the top’s surface as one colour 
that is mixed of all the colours in its surface. 

[58] Now if sight perceived the quiddity of the colour instantaneously, i.e. at 
every instant 1 of the time during which the top revolves, it would perceive the 
quiddities of all colours in the moving top distinctly. Because if sight needed no 
time to perceive their quiddities, it would be able to perceive them in a part of the 
time of revolution, just as it perceives their quiddities when the top is stationary. 

1144a For the quiddities ofall the colours of familiar objects | are the same whether the 
top is moving or at rest. Thus the colour of a visible object remains the same and 
unchanged at every one of the instants through which the object moves, and the 
quiddities of the colours of visible objects remain the same and unchanged at 
any one instant as well as through an extent of time, provided that the time is not 
too long. If, therefore, sight does not perceive the quiddities ofthe colours in the 
top’s surface when the top moves quickly, but perceives them when the top is at 
rest or moving slowly, then sight does not perceive the quiddity of colour 
unless the colour is fixed in one place for a sensible interval of time, or moves in a 
sensible interval of time through a distance whose magnitude does not greatly 
affect the position of that colour in regard to the eye. 

[59] It is seen from this state of affairs that perception of the quiddity of 
colour must require time; it is also seen from the same state of affairs that 


Optics 


147 


146 

perception of the quiddities of all visible objects must take time; for if sight’s 
perception of the quiddity of colour must occur in time, though colour is 
perceptible by pure sensation, then the remaining forms of visible objects and 
1144b of the visible properties that are perceptible by discernment and inference | 
need time even more; therefore, perception of what visible objects are and 
perception by recognition or discernment or inference must occur in time, 
though in most cases the time is so short as not to be clearly apparent to the 
beholder. 

[60] We say, moreover, that sight must take time to perceive colour as such 
and light as such; I mean that the instant at which perception of colour as such 
or of light as such occurs is apart from the instant at which the surface of the 
eye first comes into contact with the air that bears the form [of the colour or 
light]. For colour as such and light as such are perceived only by the sentient 
after the form has occurred in the sentient body; and the last sentient perceives 
them only after the form has reached the cavity of the common nerve. Now 
the form’s arrival in the common nerve is like the light’s arrival from windows 
or apertures, through which light enters, at the bodies facing those windows 
or apertures, as happens when a cover is removed form the aperture. But the 
1145a light’s arrival from the aperture at | the body facing the aperture must take 
place in time, though this time is imperceptible. For, in order that the light 
may reach the opposite body from the aperture, one of two cases must hold: 
either the light occurs in the part of the air that lies next to the aperture before it 
occurs in the part next to it, then in the part next to that part of the air, until the 
light reaches the body facing the aperture; or the light occurs at once in the 
whole air between the aperture and the facing body and on the facing body 
itself, so that the whole air, not one part of it after another, receives the light at 
once. If the air receives the light one part after another, then the light can reach 
the opposite body only through motion, and motion must take place in time. 
But if the air at once receives the light, then the occurrence of the light in the air 
after the air had no light in it must also take place in time, though this time is 
imperceptible. For assume that the aperture through which the light enters is 
covered, and that the screen covering its surface is then raised: then, in any 
11 45b case, the instant at which the screen uncovers | a first part of the aperture, and 
at which the air in the aperture will be exposed to a part of the light, is not the 
same as the instant at which the light will occur in the air inside the aperture 
which is in contact with that part and in the air inside the aperture which 
adjoins that air. 1 For light will not occur anywhere in the air inside the covered 
aperture unless something of the aperture is exposed to the light; but nothing 
of the aperture can be exposed in less than one instant; and an instant is not 
divisible; therefore, no light will occur inside the aperture at the instant of 


II- 3 

exposing that which was exposed of the aperture. For what is exposed of the 
aperture in a single instant is not exposed one part after another; nor is what is 
exposed of the aperture in an instant a part that has magnitude; rather, what is 
exposed of it in one instant must be a point that has no magnitude, or a line that 
has no breadth; for that which has breadth and length can only be exposed one 
part after another. Further, a portion of the aperture which has breadth can be 
exposed only through motion; | and motion must take place in time; there- 
fore, that which is exposed of the aperture in a single indivisible instant is 
something that has no breadth, and, consequently, something that cannot be 
exposed one part after another. 

[61] That being so, what is exposed of the aperture in one indivisible instant 
is a point that has no magnitude. Now a line that has no breadth is not a part of 
the air, since the smallest part of air must be a body. Therefore, the point 
without magnitude or the line without breadth, namely the first thing in the 
aperture to be exposed in an indivisible instant, is the limit of a part of the air 
inside the aperture, and not a part of the air. But a point that has no magnitude 
cannot receive light; and the same is true of a line that has no breadth; bodies 
only can receive light. If such a point and such a line cannot receive light, then 
nothing of the light will occur in the air inside the aperture at the instant of 
exposing the first thing to be exposed in the aperture. Therefore, the first 

[1 46b instant at which the form occurs in the air | inside the aperture, or in a part of it, 
is not the same as the instant of exposing the first thing to be exposed in the 
aperture. And between any two instants time exists; therefore light must take 
time to pass from the air outside the aperture to the air inside it; but this time is 
quite imperceptible because of the speed with which air receives the forms of 
lights. 

[62] Similarly, if the eye turns towards a visible object which it has not been 
facing, the air bearing the form of the object thus coming into contact with the 
surface of the eye after no portion of that air has been in touch with it, then the 
form must take time to go from the air that bears it into the cavity of the 
common nerve; the sense faculty has no way of perceiving or estimating this 
time because it is short, and because the sense[-faculty] lacks the delicacy 1 and 
the power to perceive what is extremely small. To the sensef-faculty] this time 
is, therefore, as an instant to the faculty of judgement. 

[63] Again, the sentient organ does not sense the forms that reach it from 
the visible objects until after it has been affected by these forms; thus it does 

ii 47a not sense colour | as colour or light as light until after it has been affected by the 
form of colour or of light. Now the affection received by the sentient organ 
from the form of colour or of light is a certain change; and change must take 
place in time; therefore, sight can only perceive colour as such and light as such 
in time, and it is in the time during which the form extends from the sentient 


Optics 


149 


148 

organ’s surface to the cavity of the common nerve, and in [the time] following 
that, that the sensitive faculty, which exists in the whole of the sentient body, 
will perceive the colour as colour and the light as light, because the visual 
faculty exists in the whole of this interval When the form occurs in the cavity 
of the common nerve, the last sentient will perceive the colour as colour and 
the light as light. Thus the last sentient’s perception of colour as such and of 
light as such takes place at a time following that in which the form arrives from 
the surface of the sentient organ to the cavity of the common nerve. 

[64] Again, the first instant of the form’s occurrence in the surface of the eye 
is not the same as that | in which the air bearing the form first touches the first 
point to come into contact with it in that surface, assuming the eye has turned 
towards an object it has not been facing or that the eyelids, closed at first, have 
opened while facing the object. For if the eye turns towards an object it was 
not facing at first, or when the closed eyelids are opened, the first thing in the 
form-bearing air to touch the eye’s surface is a point or a line that has no 
breadth; then one part [of the air] after another [is exposed] until the 
form-bearing air comes into contact with that part of the eye’s surface in 
which the form occurs. But nothing of the form of the light or colour will 
occur in the surface of the eye when a point without magnitude or a line 
without breadth in the form-bearing air comes into contact with a point 
without magnitude or a line without breadth in the eye’s surface. For the 
smallest surface in which light or the form of colour may occur must be a 
[finite] surface. Thus nothing of the form will occur in the surface of the eye at 
the instant in which a point of that surface touches the first point to come into 
contact with it in the form-bearing air. | Therefore, the instant at which the 
form first occurs on the eye’s surface is not the same as that in which the 
form-bearing air first touches the eye’s surface, assuming the eye has turned 
towards an object it has not been facing earlier or that the eyelids, closed at 
first, have been opened. 

[65] That being the case, the form of colour or light cannot occur 
anywhere in the sentient organ or in the eye’s surface except in time; but the 
sentient cannot perceive anything of the colour or light unless their forms 
occur somewhere in the sentient organ: therefore, the sentient can only 
perceive colour as colour or light as light in time. I mean that the instant in 
which the sensation of colour as such or of light as such takes place is not the 
same as that in which the form-bearing air first comes into contact with the 
eye’s surface. 

[66] It is therefore clear from what we have said how sight perceives light 
qua light and colour qua colour, and how it perceives the quiddity of colour | 
and light, and how it perceives the quality of colour [in respect of strength and 
weakness]. 


II- 3 

[Perception of Distance] 

[67] Sight does not perceive distance — namely the distance [or remoteness] 
of a visible object from the eye — by pure sensation. Nor is perception of the 
distance of an object the same as perception of the place where the object is, 1 
nor is perception of an object in its own place 2 the result of perceiving the 
object’s distance alone, nor does perception of where an object is result from 
perceiving its distance alone; for the place where a visible object is consists of 
three things: distance [as such], direction 3 and the magnitude [or measure] of 
the distance. 

[68] Now the magnitude of distance is not the same as distance as such. For 
distance between two bodies is non-contiguity, and non-contiguity is the 
existence of a certain interval between the two separate bodies; and the 
magnitude of the distance is the magnitude of that interval. Distance as such is, 
then, something like position, and thus not the same as the magnitude of 
distance. Therefore perception of distance, i.e. non-contiguity, is different 
from perception of the measure of [spatial] interval, namely the magnitude of 
distance; nor are these two properties perceived in the same manner. 

[69] Moreover, perception of the magnitude of distance is due to perception 
11 49a of | size; while perception of both the visible object’s distance and direction 

depends on perception of position; 1 and the manner of perceiving each of these 
two is not the same as that of perceiving the other; for non-contiguity is other 
than direction, and therefore to perceive where a visible object is, is different 
from perceiving the object’s distance. 

[70] Perception of a visible object in its own place consists in perceiving five 
things: perception of the light that is in the object, perception of the object’s 
colour, perception of its distance, perception of its direction and perception of 
the magnitude of its distance. But none of these properties is perceived 
separately, or one after another, but all are perceived at once, because they are 
perceived by recognition without the discernment and inference being 
resumed. Therefore there exists no perception of distance by itself at the time 
of sensation. 1 

[71] Because a visible object is perceived [to be] in its own place, those who 
held the doctrine of [visual] ray believed that vision takes place by means of a 
ray which goes out of the eye and reaches the object, and that vision occurs 
through the ray’s extremities. 1 They argued against the proponents of 
physical science, saying: if vision takes place by means of a form which passes 
from the visible object to the eye, and if the form occurs within the eye, then 

!i vjb why does sight perceive the object | in its own place outside the eye while its 
form exists inside the eye? These people have ignored the fact that vision is not 
achieved by pure sensation alone, and that it is accomplished only by means of 


150 


Optics 


discernment and prior knowledge, and that without discernment and prior 
knowledge sight would achieve no vision whatever, nor would there be 
perception of what the visible object is at the moment of seeing it. For what 
the object is is not perceived by pure sensation, but [either] by recognition or 
by resuming the discernment and inference at the moment of vision. Thus if 
vision were effected by pure sensation alone, and if all perceptible properties in 
the visible objects were perceived only by pure sensation, then the object 
would not be perceived where it is unless it was reached by something which 
touched and sensed it. But if vision is not effected by pure sensation; and if all 
perceptible properties of visible objects are not perceived by pure sensation; 
and if vision is not accomplished without discernment, inference, and recog- 

n 50a nition; and if many of the visible properties | are perceived only by dis- 
cernment; then to perceive a visible object in its own place there is no need for 
a sentient [thing] to extend to it and touch it. 

[72] Let us now return to the description of the manner of perceiving 
distance. We say: Distance of a visible object can be perceived separately only 
by discernment; and yet distance is one of the notions that have settled in the 
soul in the course of time, in as much as the soul has not been aware of its 
settlement on account of the continual existence of this notion and its repeated 
presence before the faculty of discernment. To perceive it, therefore, there is 
no need to resume the discernment and inference at the time of perceiving each 
visible object. Nor does the faculty of discernment, upon perceiving each 
visible object, search for the manner in which the notion of distance has settled 
in itself, because it does not discern the manner of perception at the time of 
perceiving each visible object. Rather, it perceives distance along with the 
other properties [contained] in a visible object; and at the time of perceiving 
the object, it perceives that [distance] by prior knowledge. 

[73] The manner in which the faculty of judgement perceives distance by 
means of discernment is as follows. When the eye turns towards a visible 

11 50b object which it has not been facing, | it perceives the object; and when it turns 
away from it, the perception ceases. Similarly, when the eyelids are opened, 
while the eye faces one of the visible objects, sight will perceive that object. 
When the eyelids are closed after perceiving the object, that perception comes 
to an end. Now it is natural to the mind [to judge] that that which is produced 
in the eye while in a certain position but ceases when the eye turns away is not 
something fixed inside the eye nor does its agent reside within the eye. When 
the discerning faculty perceives that that thing which is produced in the eye 
and through which sight perceives the object does not exist within the eye nor 
does its agent reside within the eye, it perceives that what is produced in the 
eye is something that comes from outside and that its agent is outside the eye. 


II. 3 I5i 

U - u And since vision ceases upon the eyelids being closed or the eye turned away, | 
and since it occurs upon opening the eyelids or turning the eye towards the 
object, the discerning faculty perceives that the seen object cannot be in 
contact with the eye. And when the discerning faculty perceives that the seen 
object is neither in the eye nor in contact with it, it perceives that a distance 
exists between the object and the eye. For it is natural for the mind to realize, 
or it is extremely manifest to the faculty of judgement, that that which is not 
inside a body or in contact with it must be at a distance from it. This, then, is 
the manner in which perception of the reality of distance of a visible object, qua 
distance, takes place. 

[74] In order to perceive distance, however, the discerning faculty does not 
require the detailed account which we have given for clarification only. 1 That 
faculty perceives the conclusion of this detailed account at the moment of 
vision without the need to go into details. Thus from the sight’s perception of 
the visible object upon facing it, and from the cessation of perception upon the 
eye being turned away from it, or upon closing the eyelids, the discerning 
faculty perceives at once that the object lies outside the eye and is not in contact 

11 S ib with it. In this manner the discerning faculty perceives that a distance exists j 
between the visible object and the eye. Then, because of the continuity and 
repetition of this state of affairs there is established in the soul the realization 
that all visible objects lie outside the eye, or that every visible object is at a 
distance from the eye, without the awareness of this being established or of the 
manner in which it has been established. The distance of a visible object from 
the eye must therefore be perceived [at first] by discernment or by a little 
discernment, [this perception] being the result of the discerning faculty’s 
perception that the vision occurring in the eye is due to something outside the 
eye. Then this notion is established in the soul, so that whenever a visible 
object is seen, the discerning faculty understands that the object lies outside 
the eye or at a distance from it. 

[75] Nevertheless, distance is not perceived separately, as we said earlier, 
since it is perceived only in conjunction with other properties. We shall show 
how distance is perceived along with position, and how the seen object is 
perceived in its own place, when we speak of the manner of perceiving 
position. 

[76] The magnitudes of distances, however, are perceived differently by 
sight. Some [distances] are perceived and their magnitudes ascertained 1 by the 
sense of sight, others are such that their true magnitudes are not perceived by 

i! 52a the sense of sight. | That a visible object is at a distance from the eye is 
perceived and realized 2 in the case of every object, but sight does not ascertain 
the magnitude of the distance in the case of every object. Some visible objects 


n 



152 


Optics 


153 


are such that ordered and connected bodies 3 exist between them and the eye, 
while others are not of this description, there being no connected bodies 
ordered along their distances. As for those whose distances extend along a 
series of continuous bodies, when sight perceives the ordered bodies along 
their distances it will perceive the magnitudes of those bodies. And having 
perceived their magnitudes, it will perceive the magnitudes of the intervals 
between their extremities. And the interval between the two extremities of the 
seen body that extends [all] along the distance between the visible object and 
the eye, of which extremities one lies next to the object and the other next to 
the viewer, 4 is the distance of the object from the eye, because it lies [all] along 
the interval between the eye and the object. Thus when sight perceives the 
magnitude of this interval, it will perceive the magnitude of the object’s 
distance. Sight therefore perceives the magnitude of distances of visible 
objects, | whose distances stretch along a series of continuous bodies, from 
perceiving the magnitudes of the ordered and continuous bodies lying along 
their distances. 

[77] Now some of these visible objects are at moderate distances, while 
others are not. As for those at moderate distances, sight perceives, correctly 
and with certainty, the magnitudes of their distances. For sight correctly and 
certainly perceives moderately distant objects between which and the eye 
there exist ordered and continuous bodies. And if it perceives these objects 
with certainty, then it perceives the ordered intervening bodies with certainty. 
And if it perceives these bodies with certainty, then it perceives the intervals 
between their extremities with certainty. And if it perceives the intervals with 
certainty, then it perceives the magnitudes of the distances of visible objects 
that lie along these intervals with certainty. Thus if the distances of visible 
objects extend along | ordered and continuous bodies, and they are moderate 
distances, then sight will perceive their magnitudes correctly and with 
certainty. By ‘certainty’ I mean the utmost of what the sense can perceive. 

[78] But sight does not perceive correctly and with certainty 1 the magni- 
tudes of distances of those immoderately distant objects whose distances 
extend along a continuous series of bodies which are themselves perceived. 
For sight does not distinctly perceive 2 visible objects whose distances are 
immoderate. And if ordered and continuous bodies exist between the eye and 
these objects, sight will not distinctly perceive all of these bodies, and 
consequently will not distinctly perceive the intervals between their extre- 
mities, and therefore will not distinctly perceive the distances that separate 
[the eye] from the visible objects at the extremities of those bodies. | There- 
fore, sight does not distinctly perceive the magnitude of distances of immo- 
derately distant objects between which and the eye there exists a continuous 
series of bodies. 


II- 3 

[79] Sight does not, however, perceive the magnitude of distances of 
objects when these distances do not extend along ordered and continuous 
bodies. And for this reason when sight perceives clouds in the plains or in 
mountainless regions, it will take them to be excessively far — by analogy 
with celestial bodies. If, however, a cloud forms between mountains and is 
continuous, the mountain tops will be hidden by it. And if the cloud is 
discontinuous, the mountain tops will appear above it, and sight will perceive 
pieces of the cloud attached to the mountain’s side; this will often occur in the 
case of not very high mountains. It will therefore appear from this con- 
sideration 1 that the distances of clouds are not excessively great, and that 
many of the clouds are closer to the earth than the mountain tops, and that 

n 54a what is thought regarding their excessive distance is erroneous and | untrue. 

From this it is shown that sight does not perceive the magnitude of a cloud’s 
distance when perception takes place in the plains, and that such magnitude is 
perceived when the cloud lies between mountains, so that the mountain tops 
appear above it and the parts of the mountain close to the cloud are perceived. 

[80] This state of affairs holds also for many of the visible objects that stand 
on the surface of the ground, namely that sight will not perceive the 
magnitude of their distances if these distances do not extend along ordered and 
continuous bodies. The following will clearly show that sight does not 
perceive the magnitude of an object’s distance unless the latter lies along a 
series of continuous bodies, and unless sight perceives those bodies and 
ascertains their magnitudes. Let the experimenter go to a chamber or place 
which he has not entered before, and let there be a narrow hole in one of the 
walls of this chamber or place, and behind that hole let there be an open space 

11 54b which the experimenter has not previously observed. Let | two walls stand in 
that space so that one of them will be closer to the hole than the other. Let there 
be a sizable distance between the two walls and let the nearer wall hide part of 
the farther and let the other part of the farther wall be visible. Let the hole be 
above the ground so that upon looking through it the observer will not see the 
ground-surface behind the wall that has the aperture. Having come to this 
place and looked through the aperture, the experimenter will see the two walls 
together without perceiving the distance between them. If the distance of the 
first wall from the aperture is excessively large, he will perceive the two walls 
as contiguous and may take them to be a single, continuous wall if their colour 
is the same. If the first wall is moderately distant from the aperture and the 
observer senses the two walls as two, he will take them to be close together or 
contiguous and fail to ascertain the distance between them. He will also 
perceive the first wall, if moderately distant, as if it were close to the apqrture, 

11 55a without ascertaining its distance either. | Thus the distance between two such 
bodies cannot be ascertained by the sense of sight; nor would sight be able to 


154 


Optics 


155 


ascertain such a distance if [it] had not previously observed that place and those 
two walls, or if it had had no previous knowledge of the distance between 
them. Sight may perceive two such bodies as being contiguous, even if it had 
previous knowledge of the distance between them. 

[81] Now if sight cannot perceive the distance between two such bodies, 
then it cannot perceive the magnitude of the distance of the far body, even 
though it perceives [the body’s] form. And if it cannot perceive the magnitude 
of this body’s distance while perceiving the body itself (provided there is no 
perception of the bodies lying along that distance) , then sight cannot distinctly 
perceive a visible object’s distance from perception of the object’s form, and 
therefore cannot perceive the magnitude of an object’s distance except by 
inference. 1 But no inference of a given magnitude is possible through the sense 

1 55b of sight | except by comparing that magnitude with another which sight has 

previously perceived or with one which it simultaneously perceives. And 
there is nothing by means of which sight may estimate the object’s distance 
and with which it may compare 2 the distance (so that the distance is distinctly 
perceived by reference to that thing) other than the ordered bodies extending 
along the object’s distance. For an estimation by anything other than those 
bodies would be conjectural and not certain. Thus the magnitude of an 
object’s distance will not be perceived by the sense of sight unless that distance 
stretched along ordered and continuous bodies and unless sight perceived 
those bodies and their magnitudes. 

[82] Parallel phenomena to the experiment we have described can be 
observed in many objects. When an observer looks at two persons 1 (or poles 
or palm trees) standing on the ground, with a sizable distance between them, 
and one of them appears to hide part of the other, but the observer does not 
perceive the ground between them; and, assuming that he has not previously 

156a seen those two poles or persons, j and that the far person is not excessively 
distant, then upon looking at them together he will take them to be con- 
tiguous, or with a small distance between them, and will not sense the 
magnitude of their distance from each other. When he then changes position 
so as to see the continuous ground between them, he will perceive the distance 
of the far person [from himself] and the distance between the two persons, and 
become aware of the sight’s error in the first perception. If, therefore, the 
observer were able to perceive the distance of each of these two persons from 
the eye upon looking at them without being aware of the continuous ground 
between them, he would have perceived their distance from each other at the 
moment of perceiving them together when one of them hides [part of] the 
other and before perceiving the continuous ground between them. 

[83] Similarly, when the observer looks through a hole leading to an open 
space in which a rope has been placed across the hole and at a sizable distance 


H. 3 

from it; and assuming that a sizable distance separates the observer from the 

11 <6b hole and that he does not see the continuous ground | along the distance 
between the hole and the rope or rod; then he will take that transverse rope or 
rod to be contiguous to the hole or very close to it, and will not perceive the 
magnitude of the distance between them — unless he perceives the continuous 
body along that distance or unless he had previous knowledge of it. 

[84] From consideration of these states of affairs it is evident that sight does 
not perceive the magnitudes of distances of visible objects from itself unless 
these distances extend along a series of continuous bodies, and unless sight 
perceives those bodies and their magnitudes. 

[85] As for the distances of separate visible objects [from one another] sight 
will perceive them from its perception of their separation. But as for the 
magnitude of distances between [such] objects, their case with respect to sight 
will be the same as that of distances of objects from the eye. For if between two 
separate objects there exist ordered and continuous bodies, and sight perceives 
those bodies and their magnitudes, then it will perceive the magnitude of the 

1157a distance between those two | objects. When, however, no ordered and 
continuous bodies exist between the two objects, sight will not ascertain the 
distance separating them. And, similarly, if ordered and continuous bodies 
exist between the two objects, but they are excessively distant, so that sight 
cannot ascertain the magnitudes of these bodies, then it will not ascertain the 
magnitude of the distance between those two objects. 

[86] Thus the distances of visible objects from the eye are judged by a 
perception of the faculty of judgement, 1 for vision is produced in the eye by 
something external and by the occurrence of this thing in the soul and its 
becoming unconsciously established 2 [there] over the course of time. Further, 
only the magnitudes of those distances of visible objects are ascertained by the 
sense of sight which lie along continuous bodies, provided also that these are 
moderate distances and that sight perceives the bodies ordered along them and 
ascertains the magnitudes of those bodies. Sight cannot ascertain the magni- 

u 57b tude of distances of any other visible objects. | Objects of which the distances 
[from the eye] cannot be ascertained in magnitude [fall into three groups]: 
some are objects whose distances extend along ordered and continuous bodies 
which are also visible, but these objects are excessively distant; others are 
objects whose distances, whether moderate or immoderate, extend along 
ordered and continuous bodies which, however, are not visible to the eye; and 
others still are objects whose distances do not extend along ordered and 
continuous bodies, and these are objects suspended above the ground, in the 
absence of a mountain or wall in line with which the distances of such objects 
extend. All visible objects fall into these divisions. 


L 


156 


Optics 


I [87] When sight perceives objects the magnitudes of whose distances it 

cannot ascertain, the faculty of judgement immediately conjectures 1 their 
magnitudes by comparing 2 their distances with those of objects which sight 
has previously perceived and whose magnitudes it has ascertained; for [the 
purpose of] this comparison it will rely on the form of the object and the 
similar forms which it has previously perceived and the magnitudes of those 
distances the faculty of judgement has ascertained; thus it will compare the 
1 5 8a distance of the visible object | whose distance is not ascertained in magnitude 
to the distances of similar objects which sight has previously perceived and the 
magnitudes of whose distances have been ascertained by the faculty of 
judgement. If the discerning faculty cannot ascertain the outline of the object’s 
form, it will compare the magnitude of the form as a whole with the 
magnitudes of equal forms whose magnitudes have been ascertained, thus 
likening the object’s distance whose magnitude it cannot ascertain to the 
already ascertained magnitudes of objects equal in size to the present object. 

[88] That is the limit of what the discerning faculty is capable of in the 
process of attaining perception of the magnitudes of the distances of visible 

I objects [from the eye]. Sometimes it happens that it correctly perceives by 

' means of this comparison 1 the distances of such objects, and sometimes it errs. 

Also, when it achieves correct perception, it cannot be sure that it has done so. 
This conjecture 2 is made extremely quickly on account of the many times in 
which the discerning faculty has been accustomed to perceiving the distances 
of visible objects by conjecture or with certainty. 3 

[89] The faculty of judgement may conjecture 1 the magnitude of an object’s 
5 sb distance | if the distance 2 extends along a series of bodies and if it is a moderate 

distance and sight is able to ascertain the magnitudes ofthose bodies — because the 
faculty of judgement has been accustomed to conjecture the distances of objects 
and because of the speed ofits conjecture. If the object’s distance is a moderate one, 
no great discrepancy will exist between the conjectural distance and the true. 

[90] Thus when sight perceives any visible object, the faculty ofjudgement 
at once perceives its distance and also perceives the magnitude of this distance 
either with certainty or by conjecture, and there arises at once for this distance 
an imagined magnitude in the soul. If the object’s distance extends along a 
continuous series of bodies, and it is a moderate distance, and the sight 
perceives those ordered bodies along the object’s distance and takes notice of 
them; and, further, if the faculty ofjudgement had previous knowledge of 

59a those bodies and ascertains their magnitude; then the magnitude | perceived 
by the sense of sight as appertaining to the distance of that object (whose form 
is imagined in the soul) is an ascertained and assured magnitude. 

[91] If, however, the object’s distance does not extend along ordered and 
continuous bodies; or, if the distance extends along such bodies, and sight is 


II. 3 1 57 

capable of perceiving them, but the distance is excessively large and sight fails 
to ascertain the magnitudes of those bodies; or, if the distance extends along 
ordered and continuous bodies, but sight neither perceives those bodies nor 
their magnitudes; or, if it is possible for sight to perceive those bodies but has 
not immediately noticed them or estimated their magnitude, 1 whether the 
distances of those visible objects are excessive or moderate; then the magni- 
tude perceived by the sense of sight as appertaining to the object’s distance that 
has these properties, and which is imagined in the soul, is a non-ascertained 
and non-assured magnitude. 

[92] Further, the distances existing between separate visible objects are 
perceived only through perception of the objects’ separation. And perception 

11 59 b of the magnitudes | of distances between separate objects is like perception of 
the magnitudes of distances of visible objects from the eye: some are perceived 
with certainty, others are perceived by conjecture. Thus when sight perceives 
two separated objects, it perceives the distance between them and imagines 
that distance to be of a certain magnitude. If between the two objects there 
exist ordered and continuous bodies, and sight perceives those bodies and 
ascertains their magnitudes, then the magnitude imagined by the sight as 
belonging to the distance between those two objects will be an ascertained 
one. But if no ordered and continuous bodies exist between the two objects, 
or if such bodies exist but sight does not ascertain their magnitudes, or if it has 
no perception of these bodies, then the magnitude imagined by the sight as 
belonging to the distance between the objects will not be ascertained or 
assured. It is in these manners, then, that perception of the distances of visible 
objects is achieved. 

ii 60a [93] As for familiar objects | at familiar distances which have been 

repeatedly and frequently perceived, sight will perceive the bodies along their 
distances and ascertain the magnitudes of those distances because of their 
having been repeatedly and frequently presented to the eye; and because their 
distances have appeared many times before that organ, sight will perceive the 
magnitudes of those distances by recognition. For when sight perceives a 
familiar object and from a familiar distance, it recognizes both the object and 
its distance and conjectures the magnitude of that distance. And when it 
conjectures the magnitude of distances of such objects, there will be no great 
discrepancy between its conjecture and the true magnitude of the distance. 
Thus sight perceives the magnitude of distances of familiar objects [located] at 
familiar distances by a recognition based on its conjecture of the distances’ 
magnitudes, there being no great discrepancy between such conjecture and 
their true magnitudes. It is in this manner that most of the distances of visible 
objects are perceived. 


158 


Optics 


i 59 


[Perception of Position] 

60b [94] As for the position which sight | perceives of visible objects, this falls 

into three species. 1 One is the position of the object as a whole, or of one part 
of it, relative to the eye; this species is opposition. The second species consists 
of [the following]: the position, relative to the eye, of the object’s surface 
opposite the eye; the positions, relative to the eye, of the object’s surfaces 
opposite the eye — if the object has a number of surfaces some of which are 
visible; and the positions, relative to the eye, of the lines or intervals between 
any two points or any two objects which sight simultaneously perceives and 
the images of which it acquires. The third species consists of: the positions of 
the object’s parts in relation to one another; the positions of the parts of the 
object’s surface in relation to one another; the positions of the extremities of 
the object’s surface in relation to one another; and the position of parts of those 
extremities in relation to one another. This species is order. The positions of 
dispersed objects with respect to one another also belong to this species. All 
positions perceived of visible objects fall into these three species. 

Ata [95] Now the position | of any object with respect to another consists only 

in its distance from and orientation with regard to the other. 1 Thus the 
opposition between a visible object and the eye consists in the object’s distance 
from the eye and its direction [or location] relative to the eye. As for 
perception of the object’s distance, this has been shown to be something 
which has been established in the soul. But the direction of the object is 
perceived by the sentient on account of the eye’s position at the moment of 
vision. For sight can perceive an object only as being placed opposite it and 
only when the eye faces in the object’s direction. 2 Now directions [or 
locations of objects relative to the eye] are perceived by the sense and by 
judgement, 3 and sense and judgement 4 can differentiate between directions 
[or locations] even if no visible objects exist in [those locations]. The faculty of 
judgement also differentiates between a location facing the eye and others 
close to that location, and it perceives all directions by imagination and 
discernment. 5 Thus when sight perceives a visible object upon facing in a 
certain direction, then turns away from that direction to face another, the 
perception of that [first] object ceases. And upon the sight’s facing again in the 
[former] direction, vision of that object will return. 

61b [96] Now if sight perceives | a visible object upon facing in the direction of 

that object; and if the faculty of discernment perceives the direction in which 
the sight faces at the moment of perceiving the object; and if vision of the 
object ceases when the eye turns away from that direction; then the faculty of 
discernment will perceive that the object is indeed in the direction in which the 
sight faces at the moment of seeing that object. Thus from the eye’s facing in 


II. 3 

the direction of the visible object at the moment of vision, the direction of the 
object becomes determined for the sentient and for the faculty of judgement. 

[97] It has also been shown that sight is characterized by receiving the forms 
along the lines of the ray, and that it is affected by the forms through those 
lines alone. And, moreover, it has been shown that the forms extend in the 
body of the eye along the lines of the ray. Thus when the form of the visible 
object occurs in the eye, the sentient senses the form and senses the part of the 
eye in which the form occurs, and senses the direction 1 in which the form 
extends in the body of the sentient organ and through which that form is 
perceived, i.e. the direction 1 of the radial lines which extend between the eye 
and the object. And when sight perceives the location of the form in the eye 

11 62a and the line of direction in which the form has extended, | the faculty of 
judgement will perceive the direction in which that line extends. And the 
direction of that line’s extension is the direction of the object. Thus the faculty 
ofjudgement will gain a precise perception of the direction in which the form 
has extended from the sentient’s perception of that part of the eye in which the 
object’s form has occurred, and from its perception of the line in which the 
form has extended and along which the sight has been affected by the form. In 
this manner the visible objects are distinguished with regard to their direc- 
tions, as sight distinguishes dispersed visible objects by distinguishing the 
separate locations on the surface of the sentient organ in which the forms of the 
dispersed objects occur. 

[98] Perception of the direction [or location] of a visible object in this manner 
has a parallel in the objects of hearing. For the sentient perceives sounds by the 
sense ofhearing, and it perceives the direction from which the sound has come, 
and differentiates between a sound coming from the right and another from the 
left, and between a sound coming from in front and another from behind. It also 
differentiates between the directions of sounds in a more subtle way, thus 

11 62b distinguishing between close locations from which the sounds have come, | as 
well as between the sound coming from a directly opposite direction and one 
from a direction inclined to it. Now the sentient cannot distinguish the 
directions of sound in relation to the [organ of] hearing except through the lines 
on which the sounds come to that [organ], for directions in relation to the 
hearing can be distinguished only by means of those lines. For the sense of 
hearing perceives sounds and perceives the lines along which they come; and 
from perception of the lines on which the sounds come to the hearing and along 
which the sound strikes that [organ], the faculty ofjudgement perceives the 
direction from which the sound has come. Thus, just as the directions of sounds 
are perceived by the sense ofhearing, and the faculty of discernment perceives 
them by means of that sense, so the directions of visible objects are perceived by 
the faculty of discernment by means of the sense of sight. 


L 


i6o 


Optics 


[99] That the sentient perceives the line along which the sight is affected by 
the form of the visible object is clearly shown by what is perceived in mirrors 
by reflection. For the visible object seen in a mirror by reflection is perceived as 
:i 63a being opposite the eye. But the object [itself] is not placed opposite the eye; | 
rather, it is the form [of the object] that reaches the eye along the straight lines 
(which are lines of the ray) extending from the eye in the opposite direction. 
When sight therefore senses the form through the lines of the ray, it assumes 
the object to be at the extremities of those lines, and that the form must have 
passed along those lines because it lies at their extremities. For sight does not 
perceive any of the familiar and frequently perceived objects except at the 
extremities of the lines imagined between the eye and the object, i.e. the lines 
I of the ray. Thus from the sight's perception of the object by reflection as 

[lying] opposite the eye and along the straight lines on which the reflected 
form reaches the eye, it appears that the sentient acquires the sensation 
through the line on which the form arrives and through which sight is affected 
by the form. And when the sentient receives sensation through the line on 
which it is affected by the form, the faculty of judgement perceives the 
I direction in which that line extends, and thus perceives the direction [or 

location] of the object. The sentient thus acquires a general perception of the 
direction of the visible object from its perception of the orientation of the 
:163b eye 1 | at the moment of vision. And the faculty of judgement perceives the 
direction in a general way from its perception of the orientation of the eye 1 at 
the moment of vision, and it acquires an ascertained and precise perception of 
it by perceiving the line on which the eye is affected by the object’s form. Now 
the distance of the object is something which has been established in the soul. 
Therefore at the moment when the form occurs in the eye, the faculty of 
judgement perceives the direction of the object in addition to the notion of 
distance which has been established in itself. And the conjunction of distance 
and direction is opposition. Therefore when the faculty of discernment 
perceives the direction and distance of the object together, it perceives the 
object’s opposition. Thus perception of opposition results from perception of 
both the object’s direction and its distance, and perception of direction takes 
place in the way we have described. When, therefore, the object’s form occurs 
in the eye, the sentient senses the place in the sentient organ where the form 
has occurred, and the faculty of judgement perceives the direction of the 
object through the line on which the form has extended. And since the notion 
of distance has been established in that faculty, it will perceive the direction 
and distance simultaneously at the moment when the sentient senses the form. 

1 64a At the moment | the sentient perceives the form, the faculty of judgement will 
perceive the opposition. It is in this manner that perception of opposition takes 
place. 


161 


II. 3 

[100] Now it has been shown how sight perceives the form of a visible object 
by pure sensation. Thus at the moment when the object’s form occurs in the 
eye, the sentient perceives the object’s colour and light and the place in the eye 
that has been coloured and illuminated by that form; and the faculty of 
discernment perceives the object’s direction and distance at the moment when 
the sentient perceives its light and colour. It therefore comes about that 
perception of light and colour and direction and distance takes place at once, i. e. 
in the smallest amount of time. But direction and distance constitute oppo- 
sition, and light and colour constitute the object’s form, and perception of the 
object [as lying] opposite the eye consists of perception of the form and of 
opposition. Therefore perception of the object as lying opposite the eye is due to 
the fact that the light and the opposition are perceived simultaneously. Then, 
because of the continuity and frequent repetition of this state of affairs, the form 
becomes a sign for the sentient and for the faculty of discernment. And at the 
moment of the form’s occurrence in the eye, the sentient perceives the form 

ii 64b and | the faculty of discernment perceives the opposition, and thus perception 
of the object in its own place is constituted. It is in this manner, therefore, that 
perception occurs of the object, and of any part of it, in its own place. 

[101] If the distance of the object is a moderate one whose magnitude is 
certain, then the place in which the object is perceived by sight is its true place. 
But perception of the object as opposed to the eye is always certain, even if the 
distance of the object is not one of which the magnitude is ascertained. For 
opposition consists of direction and of distance qua distance. The place where 
the object is [in this case] perceived by sight will be conjectural and uncertain, 1 
because ascertained position can be perceived only by ascertaining the magni- 
tude of the distance. 

[102] Positions of the surfaces of visible objects fall into two classes: 
frontality and inclination. 1 A surface is frontally [oriented] with regard to the 
eye when, being perceived in this position by the eye, the axis of the ray 
perpendicularly meets a point in it. A surface is inclined when, being 

ii 65a perceived | in this position by the eye, the ray’s axis, meeting a point in it, will 
be inclined in various ways to the surface and not be perpendicular to it. 

[103] The extremities [or edges] 1 of the surfaces of objects, and the lines in 
objects and the intervals between objects or between their parts, divide into two 
classes: one contains the lines and intervals that intersect the radial lines; the 
other contains the lines and intervals parallel to [or] collinear with the radial 
lines. 2 The positions of lines and intervals that intersect the radial lines, like the 
positions of surfaces, divide into frontal and inclined [positions]. A frontal line 
is that which the ray’s axis perpendicularly meets at a point in it. An inclined line 
is that which will be inclined to the ray’s axis when the latter meets it in a point. 


162 


Optics 

[104] Now sight perceives the inclination or frontality ofsurfaces 1 and lines 
from its perception of the inequality or equality between the distances of the 
extremities of those surfaces and lines [from the eye]. Thus when sight 

11 65b perceives the surface of an object, | and, perceiving the distances of its 
extremities [from the eye] it becomes aware of the equality of those distances, 
or of the equality of the distances [from the eye] of two opposite points that are 
equidistant from the point in the surface at which it is gazing, then it will 
perceive the surface as frontal to [the eye], and the faculty of discernment will 
judge the surface to be frontally [oriented]. But if, having perceived the 
object’s surface, sight perceives the distances of its extremities to be different, 
and does not find in the surface two equally distant points from the eye that are 
equidistant from the point at which it is gazing, then it will perceive the 
surface to be inclined with respect to itself, and the faculty of discernment will 
judge the surface to be oblique. 

[105] And similarly with the positions of frontal and inclined lines and 
intervals: sight will perceive the frontality or inclination of the line or interval 
when it perceives the distances of their extremities from it to be equal, or when 

* it perceives the equality of the distances from it of [any] two points [on the line 

or interval] that are equidistant from the point at which it is gazing. It will 
perceive the inclination of the line or interval when it perceives the 
1 66a inequality of the distances from it to the extremities of that line or interval, | or 
[the inequality of the distances from it of] two points equidistant from the 
point on the line or interval at which it is gazing. Such equality and inequality 
are perceived by the sentient by means of conjecture and signs. 1 It is in this 
way that sight perceives inclination and frontality. 

[106] When the surface or line is, as a whole, frontal to the eye, then not 
every single part of it will be frontal, but only that part on which the axis falls 
when frontality obtains. If the ray’s axis moves over the frontal surface or line, 
then every part on which it moves will be inclined to it save the first part 
containing the point at which the axis was perpendicular. Thus any part of a 
[generally] frontal surface or line, taken by itself, will be inclined, save that 
first aforementioned part. But the surface or line, taken as a whole, will be 
frontal. However, when the point at which the axis is perpendicular to the 

; surface or line lies at the middle of that surface or line, then the latter will be 

!i66b perfectly frontal to the eye. If that point | does not lie in the middle of the 
surface or line, then the latter will be frontal, but not perfectly. The more the 
point at which the axis perpendicularly meets the surface or line approaches 
the middle, the more the surface or line will be frontal. 

[107] As for the positions of lines and intervals that are parallel to the line of 
the ray, 1 these sight perceives from its perception of opposition. Thus when 
sight perceives the extremities of lines and intervals lying next to the visible 


II. 3 163 

objects that face it and their proximate extremities lying next to the eye, or 
close to it, then it will perceive their position and their extension in the 
direction of opposition. 2 

[108] It is in these way, therefore, that sight perceives the positions of 
surfaces, lines and intervals in relation to the eye. 

[109] Now of the surfaces, lines and intervals that intersect the lines of the 
ray, some are excessively inclined to the latter lines, others are only slightly 

[i 67a inclined to them, and others still are perpendicular to one | of the radial lines, 1 
these [last] being the surfaces, lines and intervals that lie frontally to the eye. 
Now the farther extremity of the surfaces, lines and intervals that are greatly 
inclined to the radial lines lie at a place far from the eye, next to the ends of the 
radial lines, while the nearer extremity lies at a place close to it. And when 
sight perceives a line or interval, it perceives the locations of their extremities; 2 
and likewise when sight perceives a certain surface, then, from its perception 
of the surface’s extension in length and breadth it perceives the locations of 
that surface’s extremities. When, therefore, sight perceives a surface that is 
inclined to the radial lines, it at once perceives the location of its far limit and 

1167b perceives it to be close to the ends of the radial lines; | and perceives the 
location of its near limit and that it is close to the eye; and the same holds when 
sight perceives a greatly inclined line or interval. And when sight feels that one 
end of a surface or line or interval is close to a place far from the eye, and that 
the other end lies at a closer location, then it becomes aware that one end of 
that surface or line or interval is far and the other near. And when it perceives 
the remoteness of one end and the nearness of the other, it perceives the 
inclined position of that surface, line or interval. Sight therefore perceives the 
inclination ofsurfaces, lines and intervals that are greatly inclined to the lines 
of the ray, as a result of perceiving the locations of their extremities. 

[110] As for surfaces, lines and intervals that are slightly inclined or 
frontally situated in relation to the eye, these sight does not perceive as 
inclined or frontal with certainty unless their distances [from the eye] are 
moderate and extend along a succession of bodies, and unless sight perceives 

11 68 a those bodies and their magnitudes, | and from these magnitudes it perceives 
the magnitudes of the distances of the extremities of those surfaces, lines and 
intervals, and also perceives the equality or inequality between the distances of 
their extremities. For none of the locations at the extremities of surfaces, lines 
and intervals that are frontal or slightly inclined lies close to the eye; rather, the 
opposed extremities are situated to the right and left or upwards and down- 
wards, or in directions between these. And if sight fails to perceive the 
magnitudes of distances from the eye of such surfaces, lines and intervals, it 
will not perceive the inequality or equality of the distances of their extremities. 


L 


164 


Optics 


And if so, it will not perceive their inclination or frontality. Thus if surfaces, 
lines and intervals are at very great distances, and their inclination is slight, 
sight will not perceive their inclination, nor will it be able to distinguish the 
frontal from the slightly inclined. | Sight will not ascertain but only conjecture 
the magnitudes of distances of such surfaces, lines and intervals. Further, the 
difference between the distances [from the eye] of their opposed extremities 
will have no appreciable amount in relation to their magnitudes. And if sight 
fails to ascertain the magnitudes of the distances of those extremities, it will 
not perceive the difference between them. And if so, it will take the distances 
to be equal and fail to perceive the inclination of those surfaces, lines and 
intervals. And if it does, it will take them to be frontal. Sight does not 
therefore perceive the inclination of surfaces, lines and intervals if their 
inclination is slight. And it perceives slightly inclined surfaces, lines and 
intervals at great distances from it as if they were frontal; and it cannot 
ascertain their position or distinguish between the inclined and the frontal 
among them from that great distance, but will rather perceive both kinds to be 
of the same character, | whether it perceives them singly or both the inclined 
and frontal ones together, because it perceives their opposed extremities to be 
of equal distances, provided it has not become aware of their difference. 

[111] It is similarly the case with surfaces, lines and intervals if their 
distances [from the eye] do not lie along ordered bodies, or if sight does not 
perceive the bodies ranged along their distances or does not ascertain the 
magnitudes of their distances: sight will not ascertain their positions or 
distinguish the frontal ones among them; rather, it will merely guess their 
positions, 1 often taking such surfaces and lines to be frontal when they are in 
fact oblique. If, however, these surfaces, lines and intervals are moderately far 
off, and their distances stretch along a series of bodies; if, moreover, sight 
perceives those bodies and their magnitudes; then sight will perceive the 
magnitudes of the distances of the extremities of these surfaces, lines and 
intervals; it will also perceive the inequality of the distances of their opposed 
extremities. | When sight perceives the equality or inequality of the distances 
of the extremities of a surface, line or interval [from the eye], it will have a true 
perception of whether that surface, line or interval is frontal or oblique. 

[112] Again, sight will not perceive the inclination of excessively inclined 
surfaces, lines or intervals unless they are at moderate distances [from it] in 
relation to their magnitudes; for sight cannot perceive the direction in which 
the extremities of a surface, line or interval lie unless it perceives how this 
surface, line or interval extends. But it will not perceive how they extend 
unless it is at a moderate distance in comparison with the magnitude of that 
surface, line or interval. Now, from perception of the location of their 
extremities, sight will perceive the inclination of excessively inclined surfaces, 


II. 3 165 

lines and intervals that intersect the radial lines. As for those that are slightly 
inclined, or frontally face the eye, sight will perceive their inclination or 
frontality from its perception of the magnitudes of the distances of their 
opposed extremities [from the eye]. But sight will not ascertain the positions 
ii - 0 a of excessively inclined surfaces, lines] or intervals unless it ascertains the 
manner of their extension. Nor will it ascertain the positions of slightly 
inclined or of frontal surfaces, lines or intervals unless it ascertains the 
magnitudes of the distances of their extremities [from the eye] and perceives 
whether the distances of their opposed extremities are equal or unequal. It is 
rare, however, that sight can be certain of the positions of visible objects. 
Most of what it perceives of these positions is perceived by conjecture, i.e. by 
conjecturing the magnitudes of the distances [from the eye] of the edges of 
objects and perceiving the equality or inequality of these distances by conjec- 
ture. Thus, in its perception of the positions of visible objects, sight relies on 
conjecture. When an observer wants to ascertain the positions of a surface or 
line in a visible object, or the position of an interval in the surface of a visible 
object, he contemplates the form of that object and the manner in which that 
surface, line or interval extends. If the form of the object is clear and distinct, 1 
ii ?ob and the inclination of the surface or line or interval is | excessive, then sight 
will perceive their true inclination from its perception of the manner in which 
they extend and of the locations of their opposed extremities. 2 If, however, 
the form of that object is clear, and the inclination of the object not excessive, 
and its distance extends along ordered bodies, then he will notice bodies along 
the distances of its extremities [from the eye] and estimate their magnitudes; 3 
he will thus perceive the inclination of that surface or line or interval and the 
magnitude of its inclination, or frontality if it is frontal, from his perception of 
the magnitudes of the distances of its extremities. 

[ 113 ] If the form is indistinct, 1 or it is clear and the inclination not 
excessive, 2 but the distance does not lie along ordered bodies, sight will not 
perceive the true position of such a surface or line or interval. Nevertheless, 
when sight finds that the form is indistinct and unclear, and the distances 
[connected with it] do not lie along ordered bodies, it will at once become 
aware that the position of that surface or line or interval is uncertain, if it is 
aiming to estimate their position. 

ii 71a | [114] It is in these ways, therefore, that sight perceives the positions of the 

surfaces of visible objects, and the positions of lines and intervals in the 
surfaces of objects, when they all intersect the radial lines. 

[115] As for the intervals that exist between separate visible objects, if they 
are excessively far, I mean if the distance of each of the two objects at the 
extremities of the interval is excessively far [from the eye] then sight will 


Optics 


i 66 

perceive such intervals as frontal, even when they are oblique, because it will 
not perceive the difference between the distances of their extremities [from the 
eye]. If one of the two objects at the extremities of the interval is closer [to the 
eye] than the other, and sight is aware of this closeness, then it will perceive the 
interval between them to be oblique in a way that accords with which of the 
two objects it perceives to be closer and which farther. If one of the objects is 
closer than the other, but sight does not perceive its closeness, then it will 

n Tib not sense the inclination of the interval between them. | Therefore, all 
surfaces, lines and intervals that intersect the radial lines, and the positions of 
which relative to the eye are ascertainable by sight, are those whose distances 
are moderate and also such that sight can ascertain the equality or inequality of 
the distances of their extremities [from the eye]. If sight fails to ascertain the 
equality or inequality of those distances, then it will not be able to ascertain 
their positions relative to the eye. 

[116] Most of what sight perceives of the positions of visible objects is 
perceived by conjecture. If the objects are moderately far, there will be no 
great difference between their conjectural and their true positions. If they are 
excessively far, and sight does not perceive a difference between the distances 
of their extremities [from the eye], then sight will perceive them as frontally 
oriented in relation to it, even if they are oblique; sight will not differentiate 
between oblique and frontal objects at excessively great distances, because if it 
fails to perceive the difference between the distances of two ends of the object 
then it will perceive these two distances as equal and, in consequence, it will 
judge the object to be frontally oriented. 1 

[117] It is in these ways, therefore, that the sense of sight perceives the 
positions of surfaces, lines and intervals. 

11 —a [i 18] As for the positions of the parts | of an object relative to one another, 

and the positions of the limits of an object’s surface or surfaces relative to one 
another, and the mutual positions of separate objects (all of which fall under 
order), sight will perceive them from perception of those places in the eye 
where the forms of the parts occur and from the faculty of judgement’s 
perception of the order of the parts of the form produced in the eye for the 
whole object. For the forms of objects occur in the surface of the sentient 
organ, and the form of every part of the object’s surface occurs in a part of that 
portion of the sentient organ’s surface where the form of the whole object is 
produced. If the object’s surface has different colours, or if gaps exist between 
its parts, thus separating them from one another, the form produced in the eye 
will be of different colours, or its parts will be as separate as those of the 
object’s surface. The sentient will sense the form and every one of its parts by 
sensing the colours of these parts and their lights; it will sense those places in 


II. 3 l6 7 

the eye where the forms of the parts occur by sensing the colours and lights of 
the parts. | The faculty of judgement will perceive the order of those parts 
from the total form and from perceiving the different colours of the form’s 
parts and the separation of those parts; thus it will perceive some ot them as 
situated to the right or left, or above or below, by comparing them with one 
another; it will also perceive whether they are contiguous or separate. 

[1 19 ] As to the mutual positions of the object’s parts in the forward- 
backward direction, 1 these sight perceives only by perceiving how far the 
[various] parts are from it, and by perceiving the differences in the parts’ 
distances [from the eye] in respect of more and less. When the objects are 
moderately far, and sight perceives the magnitudes of their distances, and also 
the magnitudes of the distances of their parts, and the equality or inequality 
between the distances of those parts, then it will perceive the relative positions 
of the parts of that object in the forward-backward direction, I mean whether 
they are prominent or depressed. 2 If sight does not ascertain the magnitude of 
the distances of objects or of the distances of their parts, then it will not 
perceive the order of parts in the forward-backward direction at the moment 
of seeing them. If such objects are familiar to it and it is able to recognize them 

i and the order of their forms, | then it will perceive the order of their parts in the 
forward-backward direction and the figure of their surfaces by recognition, not 
by simple vision, if it cannot ascertain the magnitudes of their distances. In the 
case of unfamiliar and unrecognized objects, sight will perceive their surfaces as 
plane and even, if it does not ascertain the magnitudes of the distances of their 
parts, even though these parts may be variously ordered in the forward- 
backward direction. This fact becomes manifest when the eye looks at a very 
remote body in which there is a certain convexity or concavity; for sight will not 
perceive its convexity or concavity, but rather perceive it as plane and even. 

[120] Sight therefore perceives the mutual positions of the parts of an 
object’s surface with respect to [their] different directions and their separation 
or contiguity, and perceives their order, by perceiving the parts of the form 
produced in the eye for the whole object, and by perceiving the different 
colours or outlines that distinguish those parts, and as a result of the faculty of 
judgement’s perception of the order of the form’s parts. The relative positions 

b of the parts of an object | and of those of its surface, in the forward-backward 

direction relative to the eye, are perceived by sight only through its perception 
of the magnitudes of the distances of those parts and of whether the magni- 
tudes of the distances are unequal or equal. Sight will perceive the order of 
parts in respect of forward and backward in the case of [surfaces] the distances 
of whose parts it ascertains in regard to magnitude, but not when it tails to 
ascertain the magnitudes of such distances. For the sense of sight, while failing 
to ascertain the magnitudes of the distances of parts ot a tamiliar and 

12 


i 


1 68 


Optics 


recognizable object, will perceive the order of those parts by recognition; in 
the case of unfamiliar objects, however, it will fail to perceive the order of 
their parts in respect of forward and backward if it does not perceive the 
magnitudes of the distances of the parts. As for the distinct and separate parts 
of an object, sight will perceive their order by perceiving the locations in the 
eye where the forms of these parts occur, and by the faculty of judgement’s 
perception of the separation of those places in the eye. Similarly, in the case of 
different and separate objects, sight will perceive their order by perceiving the 
separation of those parts of the eye in which the forms of those objects occur. 

>4.a As for | the limits of the surface or surfaces of an object, sight will perceive 
them and their order by perceiving the part in the surface of the eye where the 
colour and light of that surface occur, and by the faculty of judgement’s 
perception of the limits of that part and of the order of its periphery. It is in 
these ways, therefore, that sight perceives the mutual positions of the parts of 
objects, of their surfaces, and of the limits of surfaces, and also the mutual 
positions of the distinct parts of visible objects and those of separate objects. 

I [Perception of Solidity] 

[121] Solidity, or the extension of a body in the three dimensions, 1 is 
perceived by sight in some bodies, but not in others. For a person endowed 
with judgement, however, it has been established by knowledge and experi- 
ment 2 that through the sense of sight he perceives only bodies; thus upon 
looking at a visible object he will know it to be a body, and on the basis of 
immediate vision will judge it to be a body, even without perceiving its 
extension in the three dimensions. As for the extension of bodies in the three 
dimensions [sight’s perception of it is achieved as follows]. Sight perceives the 

-4b extension of all bodies | in length and breadth from its perception of the 
surfaces of bodies in front of it. Having perceived a body’s surface, it will 
perceive the extension of that surface in length and breadth, i.e. the length and 
breadth ot the surface. If, further, it perceives the extension of the surface in 
length and breadth along with the established knowledge that the visible 
object is a body, then it will perceive that body’s extension in length and 
breadth, namely two of the body’s dimensions, and only the third will 
remain. Now some bodies are surrounded by plane and intersecting surfaces 
that fold into one another, others are surrounded by convex or concave 
surfaces, others still by surfaces of different shapes that intersect and fold into 
one another, and others again are contained by a single round surface. When 
sight perceives a body surrounded by intersecting surfaces of which one is 
plane, then, assuming the plane surface to be frontally facing the eye, and the 
remaining surfaces that intersect the frontal surface to be either perpendicular 
or inclined to it in such a way as to converge behind it, so that only the frontal 


II. 3 l6 9 

ii surface is visible, then sight will sense of this | and similar bodies their 
extension in length and breadth alone; it will not sense the solidity of bodies of 
this description. Assume, however, that sight perceives a body that is 
surrounded by intersecting surfaces of which the one facing the eye is inclined 
to the frontal direction, whatever the figure of that surface; assume, further, 
that that surface intersects another of the body’s surfaces in such a way that the 
eye perceives the intersection of the two surfaces along with perceiving them 
together; then, because of that intersection, sight will perceive the bending of 
the body’s surface in the direction of depth. And if it perceives the bending ot 
the body’s surface, then it will perceive the body’s extension in that depth. But 
it perceives of the inclined surface the extension of that body in length and 
breadth. And by perceiving the body’s extension in length, breadth and 
depth, it will perceive the body’s solidity. Therefore sight will perceive the 
solidity of bodies situated in this manner with respect to the eye. 

[122] Similarly, if one surface of the body frontally faces the eye, whatever 
the figure of that surface, and if the surfaces, or one of the surfaces, that 

11 -sb intersect that surface incline to it | in such a way as to diverge behind it, then 
sight will perceive the frontally facing surface of that body and also the 
inclined surface or surfaces that intersect it, and will perceive the intersection 
of these surfaces. But if it perceives the intersection, the frontal surface, and 
the inclined surface or surfaces, then it will perceive the bending of the body’s 
surface in the direction of depth. And if it perceives the bending of the body’s 
surface in the direction of depth, while perceiving of the frontal surface the 
body’s extension in length and breadth, then it will perceive the body’s 
solidity. Therefore the solidity of bodies of this description will also be 
perceived by sight. In general, sight will perceive the solidity of every body of 
which it perceives two intersecting surfaces. 

[123] If the body has a convex surface which bulges towards the eye, 
whether the body is contained by one surface or many, and whether these 

n -6a surfaces differ or | resemble one another, then, if sight perceives the convexity 
of the surface, it will perceive the body’s solidity by perceiving the convexity 
of its surface. For when a convex surface faces the eye, the distances of its parts 
from the eye will differ, the middle of the surface being closer to the eye than 
its borders. If sight perceives the surface’s convexity, then it will perceive the 
surface’s middle to be closer to it than the borders. If it senses that the borders 
are farther from it than the middle, then it will sense that the surface bends into 
the farther side. And, sensing that, it will sense the body’s extension in depth, 
relative to the facing surface. And it has perceived the body’s extension in 
length and breadth through perceiving the extension of the convex surface in 
length and breadth. Similarly, if a surface other than the one facing the eye is 
convex, and sight perceives its convexity, then it will perceive the body’s 


Optics 


170 

extension in the three dimensions. Therefore sight will perceive the solidity of 

II 76b bodies in which one or more surfaces are convex, | provided that sight 
perceives the convexity of their surfaces. 

[124] As for the body in which a concave surface exists, if sight perceives its 
concave surface, while sensing another of the body’s surfaces and its inter- 
section with the concave surface, it will sense the bending of the surface of that 
body. In consequence of this it will sense the body’s solidity. If the concave 
surface faces the eye, and no other surface of the body is visible, then sight will 
not perceive the solidity of that body, but perceive its extension in two 
dimensions only, as a result of the sight’s perception of the concave surface’s 
extension in length and breadth. Sight senses the solidity of such bodies by 
means of prior knowledge alone, not through sensing the body’s extension in 
the three dimensions. A concave surface also extends in depth, since its 
borders are closer to the eye than its middle, in addition to its extension in 
length and breadth. But if the concavity is on the side facing the eye, then from 

11 7-1 the extension of the concave surface in depth | there will be perceived only the 
extension of the space, namely the concavity, in depth, but not the extension 
[in this dimension] of the seen body to which that concave surface belongs. 

[125] Sight therefore perceives the solidity of bodies by perceiving the 
bending of their surfaces. But sight perceives the bending of surfaces of bodies 
(from which it infers the solidity of these bodies) only in the case of bodies 
which are moderately distant from the eye and at distances which are 
ascertained by sight. Of excessively distant bodies, or those at a distance 
whose magnitude is not ascertained, sight will not perceive the bending of the 
surfaces. If the bending of the surfaces of bodies is not perceptible, the solidity 
of those bodies will not be perceived by the sense of sight; for in the case of 
excessively distant objects whose distances are not ascertained, sight will not 
perceive the positions of the parts of their surfaces relative to one another, but 
will perceive them only as flat. And if sight does not perceive the relative 
positions of the parts of surfaces of bodies, then it will fail to perceive the 

11 77b bending of those surfaces. And if it does not perceive | that, and only perceives 

them as flat, then it will not perceive their solidity. Therefore sight will not 
perceive the solidity of excessively distant bodies whose distances it has not 
ascertained and the bending of whose surfaces it has not perceived. 

[126] Sight therefore perceives the solidity of bodies by perceiving the 
bending of their surfaces. The bending of the surfaces of bodies is perceived by 
sight only in the case of moderately distant objects, when the relative positions 
of the parts of the surfaces can be perceived. The solidity of other visible 
objects cannot be perceived by the sense of sight, but can be perceived only by 
prior knowledge. 1 


II. 3 171 

[Perception of Shape] 

[127] Shape, i.e. the shape of a visible object, is of two kinds: one is the 
shape of the object’s periphery or of the periphery of a part of the object’s 
surface; the second kind is the bodily shape of the object 1 or the bodily shape of 
a part of it, this being the figure of the surface of the object whose solidity sight 
perceives, or the figure of the part of the surface of the object whose solidity is 

; -vi perceived. All that can be perceived | with regard to the shapes of objects 
divides into these two kinds. 

[128] As for the shape of an object’s periphery, the sentient perceives it by 
perceiving the periphery of the form which occurs in the cavity of the 
common nerve and by perceiving the periphery of that part of the surface of 
the sentient organ in which the object’s form occurs; for the shape of the 
periphery of the object’s surface is produced in each of these two locations; 
and, therefore, the sentient will perceive the shape of the object’s periphery by 
examining either one of them. Similarly the sentient perceives the shape of the 
periphery of every part of the object’s surface by sensing the order of segments 
of the boundaries of every part in the form. If the sentient wants to ascertain 
the shape of the periphery of an object’s surface, or of a part of the surface, it 
moves the radial axis on the object’s periphery, thus determining by means of 
this motion the positions of parts of the limits of the form of the surface (or of a 
part of the surface) which occurs in the surface of the sentient organ or in the 

ii T.sb cavity of the common nerve; and by ascertaining the position | of the limits of 
the forms it will perceive the shape of the object’s periphery. In this way, then, 
the sense of sight will perceive the shape of the periphery of an object’s surface 
or of any part of it. 

[129] As for the figure of the object’s surface, sight can perceive it only by 
perceiving the positions of the parts of the surface and the similarity or 
dissimilarity of these positions; it ascertains the figure of the surface by 
perceiving the inequality or equality of the distances [from the eye] of the parts 
of the object’s surface, and the inequality or equality of the parts’ protrusions. 
For sight can perceive the gibbosity of a surface [only] by perceiving that the 
middle parts of the surface are nearer [to it] than those at the periphery, or by 
perceiving the different heights of the parts if the object’s upper surface is 
convex. Similarly sight can perceive the convexity of the edge of a surface 
only by perceiving the middle of [the edge] to be nearer [to it] than the ends, 
when the convexity faces towards the eye; or by perceiving the various 
heights of its parts when the convexity faces upwards or downwards; or by 
perceiving the various right and left bendings of the parts when the convexity 
is to the right or left. 

If [130] As for the concavity of a surface, | assuming it to be towards the eye, 

sight will perceive it by perceiving its middle parts to be farther [from it] than 


172 


Optics 


173 


those at the periphery. The case is the same with the concavity of the limit of a 
surface when the concavity faces towards the eye. Sight will not perceive the 
concavity of a surface if the concavity faces up or down or sideways, unless the 
concave surface is cut off so that its arching limit [edge] facing the eye becomes 
visible. 

[131] As for the flatness of a surface, sight can perceive it only by perceiving 
the equality of the distances [from the eye] of its neighbouring parts and the 
similarity of their order; and the case is the same with the straightness of the 
limit [edge] of the surface when that limit faces the eye. But as for the 
straightness, arching or curving of the surface’s limit, when the surface faces 
the eye and is surrounded by those limits, sight will perceive them through the 
order of the parts relative to one another. 

[132] Sight will therefore perceive whether the surface of a visible object is 
convex, concave or flat by perceiving the inequality or equality of the 
distances, heights or breadths 1 of the parts and the amount of difference 

-*;b between these distances, heights or breadths. | Similarly sight will perceive 
the convexity, concavity or flatness of any part of the surface of a visible object 
| only by perceiving the equality or difference of these parts in respect of their 

distances, heights or breadths. It is for this reason that sight perceives 
convexity and concavity only in the case of moderately distant objects when it 
can ascertain the magnitudes of their distances, the amount of difference 
between their distances [from the eye] or between their heights or breadths. 
Sight will infer the nearness of some parts of a surface by reference to bodies 
adjacent to that surface or to bodies lying along the distances of those parts, or 
by reference to bodies close to them and the nearness or farness of which it can 
ascertain. If some of the parts of a surface are prominent or depressed, sight 
will infer their prominence or depression from the bending, intersection or 
curving of those parts at the [prominent or] depressed places, and from the 
relative positions of the surfaces of those parts — that is, if sight has not 
soa previously perceived that surface or anything like it. | But if the object is a 
familiar one, sight will perceive its figure and the figure of its surface by prior 
knowledge. If, however, the object is surrounded by intersecting and vari- 
ously positioned surfaces, sight will perceive its figure by perceiving the 
intersection of its surfaces and the position and figure of each one of them. 

[133] Thus sight’s perception of the figures of objects whose solidity it can 
perceive, is due to its perception of the figures and relative positions of their 
surfaces. For sight will perceive the figure of the surfaces of objects whose 
parts have different positions by perceiving the convexity, concavity or 
flatness of those parts, and by perceiving their protuberance or depression. It is 
in these ways, then, that sight perceives the figures and shapes of the surfaces 
of objects. If the sentient wants to ascertain the figure of an object’s surface or 


II. 3 

of a part of it, it will direct the eye towards it, and make the radial axis pass 
over all of its parts, so that it may sense the distances [from it] of those 
v .b parts and the position of each of them in relation to the eye and their positions | 

relative to one another. If the sentient perceives the distances of the parts of the 
object’s surface and the positions of these parts, and it perceives the protu- 
berance, depression or flatness of the parts, then it will perceive the figure of 
the object’s surface and ascertain its shape. If it achieves true perception of the 
magnitudes of the distances of the object’s parts, then it will gain a tru 
perception of the object’s figure. But if it has no correct perception of thos^ 
distances, then its perception of the object’s figure will be untrue. Sight 
frequently errs in its perception of the figures of objects and their surfaces 
without being aware of its error. For in cases of slight convexity, concavity, 
corrugation or protrusion, when the differences between the distances of the 
[surface’s] parts [from the eye] are small, sight often fails to perceive these 
differences, even though the distances may be moderate, provided that these 
things are not very close to the eye. 

[134] Sight therefore perceives the figures of objects and of surfaces when it 
can perceive the magnitudes of the parts of their surfaces and the inequality or 

Hsia equality of the distances of those parts [from it). } And it ascertains the figures 
of objects and surfaces when it can ascertain the magnitudes of the distances ot 
the parts of those surfaces and the amount of difference between the distances 
of those parts. It is similarly the case with the peripheral shapes ot the surfaces 
of visible objects and of the parts of such surfaces: sight can ascertain these 
shapes only when they are at moderate distances [from it] and it can identify 
the order of their limits and the mutual positions of the parts of these limits and 
[also] clearly perceives their corners. Sight cannot ascertain the shapes of 
objects when it fails to ascertain the positions of their limits or fails to observe 
their corners, if such exist. It is in the manners we have shown that sight 
perceives all shapes of visible objects. 

[Perception of Size] 

[135] The manner of perceiving the size, or magnitude, of a visible object 1 is 
an uncertain subject, 2 and mathematicians have disagreed as to how size is 
perceived. The majority of them have believed that sight perceives the 

11 8 ib magnitude of a visible object only through the size of the angle produced | at 
the centre of the eye and contained by the surface of the cone whose base 
comprehends the object, and that sight estimates the magnitudes of objects by 
the sizes of the angles produced at the eye’s centre by 3 the rays surrounding the 
visible objects; thus they base perception of size on the angles alone and give 
no consideration to anything else in this [mode of] perception. 4 Some of 
them, however, believe 5 that perception of size cannot be effected by an 


174 


Optics 


175 


estimation 6 based on the angles alone but is rather accomplished by the sight’s 
taking into account the distance and position 7 of the object in addition to the 
estimation 6 by angles. 

[136] The truth of the matter is that sight cannot perceive the magnitudes of 
visible objects by an estimation based only on the angles which the objects 
subtend at the centre of the eye. For the same object does not look different in 
magnitude when its distance is moderately varied. 1 Thus when a near object, 

82a whose magnitude is perceived by sight, moves through a moderately large | 
distance away from the eye, 2 it does not look smaller but is rather perceived to 
be of the same magnitude as it looked from the first distance, provided the 
second distance is a moderate one. All familiar objects appear to be of constant 
magnitudes when their distances vary within moderate limits. 

[137] Similarly, equal objects at different distances are always seen to be 
equal, provided that the farthest among them is moderately distant. 1 Now the 
angles subtended by the same object from different, but moderate, distances 
vary appreciably in size. For if an object at a cubit’s distance from the eye 
moves farther away to a distance of two cubits, the difference between the two 

S2b angles produced in the eye by that object will be of an [appreciable] amount. | 
But sight will not perceive the object to be smaller at two cubits than it was at 
one cubit. Likewise when the object moves farther still to a distance of three or 
four cubits, it will not look smaller than it did from the first distance. And if 
the object moves away through a distance many times the first, the angles 
produced by it in the eye will considerably vary. The angles subtended at the 
centre of the eye by equal objects from such distances will also vary consider- 
ably. Nevertheless, the magnitudes [of these objects] will not be seen as 
different but as equal. 

[138] Again, if a four-sided figure with equal sides and right angles is drawn 
on the surface of a body which is then raised close to eye-level so that the figure 

83a on its surface can still be seen, sight will perceive | the square figure to be of 
equal sides; and though the angles subtended by the sides at the centre of the 
eye will differ greatly if the eye lies close to the plane of the square, sight will 
not perceive the sides of the square as unequal. 

[139] Similarly, if diameters of different positions are drawn in a circle and 
the circle’s plane is so raised as to be nearly level with the eye, then the angles 
subtended by the variously positioned diameters of the circle will greatly 
differ in accordance with their various positions. Yet sight will perceive the 
circle’s diameters as equal, despite their different positions, provided that their 
distances from the eye are moderate. 

[140] If, therefore, sight perceived the magnitudes of visible objects only 

83b through their estimation by means of the angles produced by the objects 1 1 at 

the centre of the eye, it would not perceive the equal sides of the square as 


H. 3 

equal, or the diameters of the circle as equal, or the circle as round; nor would 
it ever perceive the same object from unequal distances to be of the same 
magnitude (provided that those unequal distances are moderate), nor ever 
perceive equal objects from unequal but moderate distances to be equal. From 
consideration 2 of these states of affairs, it is therefore clear that perception of 
the magnitudes of visible objects cannot be due only to their estimation by 
means of angles. 

[141] That having been made clear, let us now show exactly 1 how 
perception of size takes place. We say: It has been shown that perception of 
most sensible properties depends on inference and judgement, 2 and that 
without these no perception of the majority of sensible properties would be 

n possible, nor would the sense be able to determine them. But size is one | of the 

properties perceived by inference and judgement. 3 And the criterion 4 on 
which the faculty of judgement depends in discerning the size of a visible 
object is the magnitude of the portion of the eye’s surface in which the form of 
the object occurs. But that portion is limited and measured by the angle which 
exists at the centre of the eye and which is contained by the radial cone 
surrounding both the object and the portion of the eye containing the object’s 
form. Thus, that portion and the angle contained by the cone surrounding it 
are the criterion without consideration of which, along with consideration of 
their magnitudes, the faculty of judgement and the sense-faculty cannot 
perceive the size of the object. 

[142] But in order to perceive size the faculty of judgement cannot be 
satisfied merely with considering 1 the angle or the [magnitude of the] portion 

(1 8+b of the eye that subtends it. For when sight perceives a single object [ which is 
close to it, the sentient will perceive the place on the eye in which the object’s 
form occurs together with the magnitude of that place. Then, if the object 
moves farther from the eye, sight will also perceive it, and the sentient will 
perceive the portion of the eye in which the form occurs in the second case 
along with its magnitude. Now when the object moves away from the eye, 
the area in which its form occurs in the eye will be smaller than the former 
area. For [the magnitude of] the area in which the form occurs varies with the 
angle subtended by that object at the centre of the eye, since the radial cone 
surrounds all of these; so that, as the object recedes from the eye, the cone 
surrounding it will become smaller, the angle of the cone narrower, and the 
portion of the eye containing the form smaller. If, therefore, the sentient 
perceives the place in which the object’s form occurs together with its 
magnitude, then it will perceive the decrease [in magnitude] of that place as the 
object recedes from the eye. 

[143] Now this state of affairs is repeatedly experienced by sight at all 

n \sa times, 1 1 mean the object’s moving farther off and closer. For it often happens 


176 


Optics 


ill 


I chat the eye and the visible objects move farther away from or closer to one 

another, and sight perceives them at their farther distances along with the 
decrease in magnitude of the areas where the forms occur in the eye, and it 
perceives the increase in magnitude of those areas as the objects draw nearer to 
it. From the sight’s repeated experience of this state of affairs, it becomes 
confirmed in the soul and in the faculty ofjudgement that as the object recedes 
from the eye, the place occupied by its form in the eye gets smaller along with 
the angle subtended by the object at the centre of the eye. And when that is 
confirmed, then it is established in the faculty ofjudgement that the [magni- 
tude of the] area where the object’s form occurs and the angle subtended by the 
object at the eye’s centre are in accordance with the object’s distance from 
j ssb the eye. And when that is established in the soul, | then the faculty of 
judgement, when discerning the object’s magnitude, will not take into 
account the angle alone, but will consider both the angle and the distance 
because it has been established in it that the angle varies with the distance. The 
magnitude of objects is therefore perceived only by judgement and inference. 
And the inference through which the object’s magnitude is perceived consists 
| in estimating the base of the radial cone, i.e. the object’s surface, by the angle 

of the cone and by its length, namely the distance of the object from the eye. 
And that which the faculty of judgement takes into consideration is the 
portion on the surface of the sentient organ which the object’s form occupies, 
together with the object’s distance from the eye. But the magnitude of that 
part always varies with the size of the angle subtended by it at the centre of the 
eye, and in most cases there is no effective difference between the object’s 
distance from the surface of the eye and its distance from the eye’s centre. 1 
! 86a [144] It has been shown, moreover, | that the sentient perceives the 

directions 1 between the eye’s centre and the object, namely those of the radial 
lines, 2 and perceives their order and the order of the visible objects and of their 
parts. But if the sentient perceives the lines of direction that extend to the 
visible object, then the faculty ofjudgement must perceive that as these lines 
recede from the eye the distances between their extremities will increase. 
And as this notion becomes repeatedly apparent to the faculty ofjudgement, 
its form becomes established in the soul. And when the soul realizes that as 
the lines of the ray extend and recede from the eye, the distances between 
their extremities widen, it will realize that as the radial lines proceed farther, 
the object surrounded by them at their extremities will be larger. When, 
therefore, sight perceives a visible object and perceives its limits, it will 
perceive the directions through which it perceives the limits of that object. 
Now these directions are the lines that surround the angle at the eye’s centre, 

1 86b which that object subtends, | namely the lines surrounding that area in the eye 
where the object’s form occurs. When sight perceives those lines, the faculty 


II. 3 

ofjudgement will form an image of 3 their extension from the eye’s centre to 
the object’s limits. And since it has also perceived the magnitude of the 
object’s distance, it will imagine the magnitude of the lengths of those lines 
and also the magnitude of the interval between their extremities. But the 
intervals between the extremities of those lines are diameters of the object. 4 
Thus when the faculty ofjudgement imagines the size of the angle and the 
extension of the radial lines surrounding that angle and their lengths, and also 
imagines the magnitude of the intervals between the extremities of those lines, 
i.e. the object’s diameters, it will perceive the true magnitude of the object. 

[145] When sight perceives a visible object and its boundary, then the 
sentient and the faculty ofjudgement will perceive the direction-lines that 
extend between the eye’s centre and the object’s limits and will perceive the 
magnitude of that part of the eye where | the object’s form occurs and which, 
being contained by those lines, subtends the angle they contain. When the 
faculty of judgement perceives the directions of the radial lines and the 
magnitude of the part of the eye surrounded by them, it will perceive their 
positions relative to one another and their divergence and the manner of their 
extension, so that nothing will remain for completing the perception of the 
size of the object at the extremities of those lines but the magnitude of the 
object’s distance. 

[146] Now it has been shown in [our discussion of] the manner of 
perceiving distance that sight perceives any visible object before it to be at 
some distance the magnitude of which is either ascertained or conjectured. 
Thus at the moment of perceiving any visible object, the faculty ofjudgement 
imagines 1 the magnitude of its distance either with certainty or by conjecture. 
And if it perceives the positions of the radial lines surrounding the object’s 
limits and the magnitude of the part of the eye’s surface contained by them, 

11 87b i.e. the size of the angle, | while imagining the magnitude of the object’s 
distance, then it will imagine both the magnitude ot the angle and of the 
distance at the moment of perceiving the object, and hence, it will imagine the 
object’s magnitude in accordance with the magnitude of both the angle and 
the distance. Thus the faculty ofjudgement imagines the magnitude of the 
distance of every visible object and imagines the lines surrounding the object’s 
limits, and by means of this imagining it realizes the figure of the cone 
containing the object and the magnitude of its base, i.e. the object, and 
consequently realizes the magnitude of the object. 

[147] There is clear evidence to show that perception of the size of a visible 
object is the result of comparing the size with 1 the object’s distance. For when 
sight perceives two objects one of which is closer to it than the other, and both 

11 8x a subtend the same angle at the centre of the eye, I mean that the rays | passing 
through the extremities of the first reach those of the second; and if the first 


178 


Optics 


179 


does not hide the whole of the second, but, rather, part of the second is visible 
behind the first; and if sight perceives the distance of each of the two objects 
with certainty, then it will always perceive the more remote object to be 
greater than the nearer. And the larger the distance of the farther object the 
greater its size will appear, provided that the sight ascertains the magnitude of 
the distance of that object. For example, let someone face a wide wall at such a 
moderate distance from his eyes that [his] sight will ascertain the magnitude of 
the distance and the width of that wall; then, having raised one hand before 
one eye so as to lie between that eye and the wall, let him look at the wall with 
the other eye closed; he will find that his hand has screened a large portion of 
88 b the wall, and will perceive the magnitude | of his hand in this situation and also 
perceive that the part of the wall screened by his hand is much larger than his 
hand. Now the radial lines that reach the boundary of his hand and of the 
screened part of the wall are the same; likewise, the angle contained by those 
lines and their width are the same. And sight perceives the direction of the 
radial lines and the angle contained by them. Therefore, it will perceive in this 
situation that the angle subtended by the hand and by the screened part of the 
wall is one and the same, and also perceive that the screened part of the wall is 
much greater than the hand. That being so, the faculty of judgement will in 
this situation perceive that of two unequally distant visible objects that 
subtend the same angle, the farther will be larger in size. 

89a [148] Then, when the observer turns his eye | to look at another wall farther 

off, placing his hand in front of his eye, he will find the magnitude of the 
screened part of the farther wall to be greater than that of the screened part of the 
first. And if, while in the same situation, he looks at the sky, he will find that his 
hand has screened half the visible sky or a large portion of it. Now the observer 
does not doubt that his hand has no appreciable size in relation to what has been 
screened of the sky. It is, therefore, clear from this experiment that sight 
perceives the size of an object by means of the magnitude of its distance as well as 
by estimation by means of the angle, and not by estimation by the angle alone. 1 
If perception of size were dependent on the angle alone, two unequally distant 
objects subtending the same angle at the eye’s centre would be seen as equal. But 
sight never perceives two such objects as equal, provided that it perceives their 
distances and makes certain of the magnitudes of these distances. Therefore, the 
faculty of judgement can only perceive the size of a visible object as a result of 
89b imagining the cone surrounding | the object and imagining the magnitude of 
the cone’s angle and length and estimating the cone’s base by the magnitude of 
both the angle and the length. That, then, is the manner of perceiving size. 

[149] Being much accustomed to judging distances of visible objects, sight, 
upon sensing the [object’s] form and distance, will imagine the magnitude of 


II. 3 

the area occupied by the form and the magnitude of the distance, and from 
both these notions will perceive the object’s size. But the magnitudes of the 
distances of objects are among perceptible magnitudes. And it has been shown 
that some magnitudes of objects’ distances are perceived with certainty, and 
others conjecturally. And those which are conjectured are perceived only by 
likening the object’s distance to ascertained distances of similar objects; and 
distances whose magnitudes are certain are those that extend along a series of 
continuous bodies. And as a result of perceiving the ordered and continuous 
bodies and ascertaining the magnitudes of these bodies, sight ascertains | the 
magnitudes of distances of the objects that lie at their extremities. It therefore 
remains for us to show how sight perceives the magnitudes of objects’ 
distances that extend along ordered and continuous bodies, and how it 
becomes aware of the magnitudes of the ordered and continuous bodies that 
lie along the distances of visible objects. 

[150] Now the ordered and continuous bodies that lie along the distances of 
visible objects are in most cases those parts of the ground close to our feet. And 
familiar objects which are seen continually and at all times are those standing 
on the surface of the ground with the body of the ground lying between them 
and the body of the beholder. Now sight always perceives and measures 1 the 
magnitudes of those parts of the ground that mediate between the beholder 
and the visible objects that stand on the surface of the ground and that lie 
along the distances of those objects. And sight perceives the magnitudes of 
those intermediate parts of the ground as a result of measuring them by one 
another, measuring the farther parts by those closer to it whose 

1190b magnitudes it has ascertained. | Then, as a result of continually perceiving 
these parts of the ground and continually measuring them and repeatedly and 
frequently experiencing this state of affairs, sight comes to perceive the. 
magnitudes of parts of the ground close to the feet by recognition and by 
likening them to similar magnitudes it has already perceived. Thus when sight 
glances at a part of the ground between it and a visible object, it will recognize 
the magnitude of that part as a result of having repeatedly perceived similar 
intermediate parts. That is one of the notions which the sentient has acquired 
from the beginning of growth and childhood and in the course of time, as a 
result of which the magnitudes of distances of familiar objects are formed in 
the imagination and established in the soul without our being aware of how 
they have become established. 

[151] As to how the sentient begins to perceive the magnitudes of the parts 
of the ground that lie between it and the visible object, [let it be remarked that] 
the first part whose magnitude it ascertains is that lying close to the feet. For 
sight will perceive the magnitude of that part, and the faculty of judgement 

u 'Ha will perceive that part and | its magnitude, and it will ascertain its extent as a 



i8o 


Optics 


result of measuring it by our body. 1 For we always measure such parts 
unintentionally by our feet whenever we step upon them, or by our arms 
whenever we stretch our hands to them. Thus all parts of the ground next to 
us are always measured unintentionally by our body. Sight perceives this 
measurement and is aware of it, and the faculty of judgement perceives and 
comprehends it, thereby becoming certain of the magnitudes of those parts of 
the ground that are contiguous and close to our body. In this way the 
magnitudes close to and surrounding us are comprehended by the sentient and 
by the faculty of judgement and their forms are imagined in that faculty and 
established in the soul. Sight always perceives those parts of the ground, and 
the sentient senses the directions extending from the eye to the limits of those 
parts as sight perceives them and as it scans the ground and the intermediate 
1 9 ib distances on the ground between the eye and the visible objects, | and the 
[sentient] perceives the parts of the sentient organ in which the form of those 
parts ot the ground occurs, and perceives the magnitudes of those parts and of 
the angles they subtend in the eye. And thus, in the course of time, the angles 
subtended by the parts of the ground close to us come to be comprehended 2 by 
| the sentient and their form imagined in the soul. The sentient will also 

perceive the magnitudes of the radial lines which extend from the centre of the 
eye to the limits of the parts of the ground close to us, and the faculty of 
judgement will perceive them and ascertain their magnitudes, since the 
lengths of these lines are always measured unintentionally by our body. Thus 
when someone, standing, looks at the ground close to his feet, the length of 
the radial lines will be measured by his height, and the faculty of judgement 
will comprehend 3 with certainty the distance between his eyes and the part of 
the ground close to his feet, which is his height. 

[152] Also, when someone looks at the ground close to where he is sitting, 

1 92a the faculty ofjudgement | will perceive that the distance, from the eyes, of the 

ground at the place where he is sitting is the same as his height in this posture. 
Thus the magnitudes of distances of places on the ground that are adjacent to 
one’s body are comprehended by the faculty ofjudgement and their form 
established in the soul. When sight glances at the part of the ground close to 
the feet, the sentient perceives the lines reaching the limits of that part, and the 
faculty ofjudgement imagines the magnitudes of these lines and of the angles 
contained by them, and consequently perceives the magnitude of the interval 
between the extremities of those lines with certainty. In this manner, then, 
sight ascertains the magnitudes of the parts of the ground surrounding us. 

[153] Sight then perceives the magnitudes of the more remote parts adjacent 
to the closer by comparing the magnitudes of the radial lines extending to their 

1 92b limits | with those of the radial lines that extend to the first parts closest to us. 

Thus the faculty ofjudgement compares the third ray reaching the farther 


II. 3 181 

limit of the second part with the second ray common to the first and second 
parts, thereby becoming aware of the amount by which the third exceeds the 
second. Having sensed this excess it will sense the magnitude of the third ray. 
And since the faculty ofjudgement has a sure perception ot the second ray’s 
magnitude, the magnitudes of the two rays surrounding the second part of the 
ground, I mean the lengths of the two lines, will become known to it. But the 
position of these lines relative to one another, which constitutes the angle, will 
be known to it as a result of perceiving the part of the eye contained by these 
two lines. And upon perceiving the length and position of these two rays, it 
will perceive the interval between their extremities with certainty. In this 
way, then, the faculty ofjudgement also perceives the magnitudes of the parts 
of the ground nearest those surrounding our feet. 

:i | [154] Again, the parts nearest those surrounding our feet are also measured 

by our body. For when we walk we measure the part of the ground on which 
we walk by our feet and our steps, and the faculty ofjudgement perceives that 
part’s magnitude. And when, walking, we pass the place in which we are and 
the parts of the ground adjacent to our feet and reach other parts next to them 
on the ground’s surface, the parts reached will now be nearest to our feet and 
will be measured in the same way as the former parts. In this way, then, the 
magnitudes of successive parts of the ground will be ascertained, the sight 
perceiving the succeeding part in the same way as it perceived the first. When, 
in the second position, sight perceives the second part now situated close to 
the feet, it will have a certain and unambiguous perception of this part’s 
magnitude. But since it perceived this part in the first position as a succeeding 
part, the first perception is now verified 1 by the second. Thus if sight did not 
ascertain the magnitude by the first estimation, it now makes sure of it by the 
ii 93b second, | and the result of the first estimation is now so determined 2 that when 

sight afterwards perceives a succeeding part of the ground it makes no error in 
estimating its magnitude. And the sentient always perceives and performs this 
measurement and judgement unintentionally. The faculty of judgement 
accidentally and unintentionally achieves this perception as a result of the fact 
that the eye always looks at those parts of the ground on which we walk. 
Then, as a result of the continuation of this state of affairs and its frequent 
repetition, and from the sight’s repeated perception of the magnitudes of the 
ground’s parts, the magnitudes of parts lying nearest the feet and of those 
adjoining them will be determined. 2 It is in this manner, therefore, that the 
sentient and the faculty ofjudgement acquire [perception of] the magnitudes 
of the surrounding and neighbouring parts of the ground that lie between the 
eye and visible objects. This acquisition takes place at the beginning of 
childhood, after which the magnitudes of the distances of familiar objects 
existing on the earth’s surface are established for the sentient and for the 


182 


Optics 


11941 


II 94b 


11 95a 


faculty of judgement, so that perception of the distances of these familiar 
objects comes to be performed by recognition | and by assimilating their 
distances to one another, at the moment of glancing at the intermediate bodies 
between those objects and the eye and without recommencing the [process of] 
judgement and inference, but rather through recognition and assimilation 
alone. 

[155] By saying that the sentient and the faculty of judgement perceive the 
magnitudes of distances of visible objects on the surface of the ground by 
acquisition, we do not mean that they perceive how many arm-lengths each 
one of these distances is; rather, there occurs for each distance and part of the 
ground a determinate, imagined magnitude 1 to which they compare and liken 
the magnitudes of distances of the objects they subsequently perceive. Again, 
each one of the magnitudes used for measurement, such as the span of the arm 
or hand, has a determinate magnitude in the sentient; and thus when the 
beholder perceives a certain distance or interval and wishes to know how 
many arm-lengths it is, it compares the form produced in the imagination for 
that distance or interval with the form it has in the imagination for the arm, 
thereby perceiving the extent of the distance relative to the arm or the like — | 
to the extent that this can be approximated by the imagination. Thus people 
say ‘there was between me and such and such a person ten or five steps, or so 
many cubits, or the range of a spear, or course of a horse, or flight of an 
arrow’, thus comparing the distance between themselves and that person by 
reference to the step or the arm’s length or its reach or some other magnitude 
whose form exists in their soul. 

[156] Again, it is the habit of human beings when they wish to identify a 
thing to look at it repeatedly and contemplate it, discerning its features, and 
examining them, thus perceiving by means of contemplation and discernment 
and repeated looking the true identity of that thing. Thus when an observer 
wishes to ascertain the distance of a visible object on the surface of the ground, 
he contemplates the continuous intermediate part of the ground and moves his 
sight over its length. As he does this the ray’s axis will move over that part, 
thereby surveying it and perceiving it one part after another and sensing | its 
smaller parts, provided that the end-point of the distance 1 is moderately far. 
When sight perceives the parts of the ground, including the smaller parts, the 
faculty of judgement will perceive the magnitude of the whole distance. For 
by moving the radial axis over the distance, the faculty of judgement will 
make sure of the magnitude of that part of the eye where the form of the 
distance occurs, and also make sure of the size of the imagined angle 
subtended by that distance in addition to the length of the ray extending to 
the end of the distance by ascertaining the ray’s extension through successive 
parts of the distance. When these two notions are determined for the faculty 


II- 3 183 

of judgement, the magnitude of that visible part of the ground will also be 
determined. The case is similar with bodies standing on the ground and 
extending in a direction away [from the eye], such as walls, buildings and 
mountains: sight perceives the magnitude of their extension on the ground in 
the same way as it perceives the magnitudes of the ground’s parts, and it 

!! ( ,<b perceives the distances of the visible objects | aligned with them from perceiv- 
ing the magnitudes of their lengths. It is in this manner, therefore, that sight 
ascertains the magnitudes of distances of visible objects if their distances are 
moderate and extend along a sequence of connected bodies. 

[157] Now some of the visible objects on the earth’s surface are at moderate 
distances and the parts of the ground between them and the eye are of 
moderate magnitudes. Others, however, are such that their distances are so 
long as to exceed the limit of moderateness, and the magnitudes of [the parts 
of] the ground between them and the eye are excessively large. But the 
magnitudes of the ground’s parts are perceived in the manner we have shown. 
Thus sight can perceive and ascertain the magnitudes of those proximate and 
moderately sized parts, as we have shown, whereas the magnitude of exces- 
sively distant parts is neither ascertained by sight nor is sight capable of such 
ascertainment. For if sight examines and contemplates intervals, 1 it will 
perceive their magnitudes as long as it senses the increase in the ray’s length 
and as long as it senses the angles subtended by the smaller parts of the interval 

11 96a as the axis moves over it, and will thus ascertain the interval’s magnitude | as 
long as it senses the small increase in the ray’s length and in the angle 
subtended by the interval. But when the distance is very large the sight will 
not sense the small increase in the ray’s length or the ray’s motion over the 
small part of the interval at that distance or the angle subtended by that small 
part; and, therefore, it will not ascertain the length of the ray that reaches the 
interval’s extremity or the magnitude of the angle subtended by the interval. 
Consequently, sight will fail to ascertain the interval’s magnitude. 

[158] Moreover, sight cannot perceive or judge the small parts at the end of 
a very distant interval because a small magnitude is invisible from such a 
distance. For when the ray’s axis moves over a very remote interval, it will 
upon approaching its far end sweep the small partfs] of the interval, but the 

96b sentient will not sense its motion, | because a small part will not produce from 
that distance an appreciable angle at the eye’s centre. Thus when the ray’s axis 
moves over a distant interval and sight senses that it has swept a part of the 
interval, the [true] magnitude of that swept part will not be the same as that 
perceived by the sentient, but will be larger; and as the interval’s distance 
increases, the inapparent parts at the interval’s end over which the ray’s 
motion is inapparent, will be greater. Sight will not therefore ascertain the 


13 


b 


Optics 


184 

magnitude of excessively large distances on the surface of the ground because 
it cannot ascertain the length of the ray that reaches their extremities or the 
magnitude of the angle subtended by that interval. 

[159] The sentient will also be aware of the certainty or uncertainty 
regarding the true magnitude of the interval. For close or moderately distant 
objects are seen more correctly, that is, their forms are clearer and sight 
perceives them more clearly, their colours and lights are more manifest, 1 and 

197a the positions relative to the eye of their surfaces | and parts, and the form of 
their parts and the parts of their surfaces are manifestly visible, and any lines, 
creases, incisions or smaller and distinguishable parts that may be in them will 
be clearly visible and distinctly perceived. Not so, however, are the exces- 
sively remote objects; for sight cannot ascertain the form of a visible object at a 
very great distance from it. Such an object will not be clearly visible, its 
colour, light, and the figure of its surfaces will be indistinct, and its minute 
features and small parts will not be apparent in it. This state of affairs is clear to 
the sense, for sight, upon glancing at an object, will sense whether its form is 
distinct or confused. Thus when sight perceives a particular interval on the 

| surface of the ground, then, upon glancing at its end or at some visible objects 

located at its end, it will sense whether this is a moderately or immoderately 
large interval as a result of ascertaining or failing to ascertain the form of the 

1 97b interval’s end or the form of some object at that end. j When it ascertains the 
form of the interval’s end, or of an object placed there, and finds it to be clear; 
and, further, when it contemplates the interval and discerns its magnitude in 
the aforementioned manner, it will ascertain the interval’s magnitude. And 
when it ascertains the magnitude of an interval of this description, the faculty 
of judgement will perceive this to be an ascertained magnitude from its 
perception of the manifestness of the form of its end or of the object at that 
end. If sight fails to ascertain such a form it will not ascertain the magnitude of 
that distance and, moreover, the faculty ofjudgement will upon contemplat- 
ing that interval perceive it to be of unascertained magnitude on account of the 
uncertainty of the form of its end or the object at that end. 

[160] Sight therefore judges the magnitudes of distances of visible objects 
and ascertains the manner in which it perceives them upon contemplating 

198a those distances. | And when the beholder wants to ascertain and discern the 
magnitude and distance of an object, he contemplates and discerns the 
distance, thereby distinguishing the certain from the uncertain distance in the 
way we have shown. There are no distances whose magnitudes can be 
ascertained other than those moderate distances that extend along ordered and 
continuous bodies. Sight perceives the magnitudes of such distances in the 
way we have determined, and it ascertains their magnitudes and senses its 
ascertainment of them. Sight cannot ascertain the magnitude of any other 


II. 3 185 

distances; rather, the sentient conjectures their magnitude by likening it to the 
magnitude of similar and familiar objects the distances of which it has 
ascertained. When sight senses the uncertainty of the object’s form on account 
of its distance, it becomes doubtful as to the magnitude of the distance even 
H g sb though it has conjectured it. A moderate distance | the magnitude of which is 
ascertainable by sight is, therefore, that from which a part near the [far] end 
and having an appreciable ratio to the whole distance would be apparent. A 
moderate distance for an object whose true magnitude is perceptible from that 
distance is that moderate distance at the end of which a portion of the object 
having an appreciable ratio to the object’s magnitude would be apparent if 
sight were to inspect that part separately. 1 An interval will be counted among 
moderate distances if every part of it near its end having an appreciable ratio to 
the interval’s length is perceptible to the eye, and only parts of it near the end 
that do not have an appreciable ratio to the interval’s length are not apparent. 
A distance exceeding the limit of moderateness in size is that near the end of 
which a magnitude bearing an appreciable ratio to the total distance becomes 
imperceptible to sight. An immoderate distance with respect to a visible 
1199a object is that at which there disappears | a portion of the object having an 
appreciable ratio to the whole object, or [at which there disappears] some 
other feature, thereby concealing the object’s identity. 

[161] Again, the sentient perceives the magnitude of the object’s distance 
from the size of the angle subtended by the object. For when sight perceives 
familiar objects from familiar distances it immediately recognizes them. And 
if it does, then it recognizes their magnitudes, since by repeatedly perceiving 
familiar objects it ascertains their sizes, and these then become established in 
the imagination. And when a familiar object is perceived, sight perceives that 
part of the eye in which the form of the object occurs together with the angle 
subtended by that part. And when the sentient perceives the size of the object 
by recognition together with the angle subtended at that time by the object, it 
immediately perceives the magnitude of the object’s distance since the angle 
ii 99b subtended by the object | must depend on the distance’s magnitude. Thus, just 
as the sentient infers the size 1 [of an object] from the [object’s] distance and the 
angle taken together, so does it infer the magnitude of the distance from the 
size [of the object], as recognized by it, together with the angle; for the size [of 
the object] subtends that angle only from that same distance or from another 
equal to it, and not from all distances. And if the sentient has consistently and 
frequently perceived the magnitude of the distance of that familiar object at 
times when it subtended that angle at the eye’s centre, and if it has frequently 
inferred the size of the object from the magnitude of its distance together with 
the size of an angle equal to that angle, then the faculty ofjudgement will have 


1 86 


Optics 


187 


II rooa 


ll 1 00b 


II 101a 


comprehended the magnitude of the distance from which it perceived the size 
of the object by reference to that angle. And if the faculty of judgement has 
comprehended the magnitude of the object’s distance by reference to that 
angle, and perceived from this distance the size of the object by reference to 
that same angle, | then, provided that the faculty ofjudgement has recognized 
the object and the size thereof which it previously perceived, and provided 
also that it has at the same time perceived the size of the angle subtended by the 
object at that time, then it will have recognized the magnitude of the distance 
in accordance with which the object’s size subtended that angle. The sentient 
therefore perceives the magnitudes of the distances of familiar visible objects 
by comparing the angles subtended by the object with the size of that object. 
Then, as the sentient repeatedly achieves in this manner its perception of the 
familiar object’s distance, it will perceive that distance by recognition, and 
thus the size of the angle subtended by the familiar object at the moment of 
seeing and recognizing the object will be a sign which indicates the magnitude 
of that object’s distance. It is in this manner that most of the distances of 
familiar visible objects are perceived. This perception is not perfectly accur- 
ate, 2 but it does not differ greatly from accurate [perception of) distance. And 
it was from this kind of perception j that mathematicians derived [the 
doctrine] that an object’s size is perceived by means of the angle; but this 
perception occurs only in the case of familiar objects, and it is based on 
conjecture, not ascertainment. 

[162] Sight also likens the sizes of unfamiliar objects to those of familiar 
ones and in this way infers 1 the magnitudes of their distances [from them]. 
When sight perceives and recognizes familiar objects from familiar distances 
and infers the magnitudes of their distances in this way it correctly estimates 
their distances in most cases or makes an estimate not far removed from their 
true distances. Sight will mostly err in its perception of the magnitudes of 
distances of unfamiliar objects, or objects which are not frequently perceived 
or whose forms are confused, or those which sight fails to recognize correctly 
or the identity of which it has failed to ascertain. It happens, however, that 
sometimes it succeeds in estimating the magnitudes it perceives in this | way. 
It is, therefore, in these manners which we have explained that magnitudes of 
the distances of visible objects are perceived by the sense of sight. 

[163] Now that we have shown the manner in which sight perceives the 
magnitudes of distances of visible objects and have explained [the matter of] 
distance of objects, we must distinguish [what relates] to sizes of objects and 
the way in which they are perceived by sight. We say: the sizes perceived by 
sight when facing visible objects are the magnitudes of their surfaces and of 
parts of their surfaces and of the boundaries of the objects and of the intervals 


II. 3 

between the boundaries of parts of the objects’ surfaces and of intervals 
between separate objects. These are all the kinds of magnitude that are 
perceptible to sight upon facing a visible object. Sight does not, however, 
perceive the magnitude of the object’s body upon facing it, because it cannot 
in this situation perceive the whole surface of the object, but only that surface 
!! icnb or surfaces facing it, even though the object may be small. | Thus when sight 
perceives the solidity of a body, it does not perceive the magnitude of the body 
but only that it is solid. Only when the body moves, or when the eye moves 
round the object so as to perceive its whole surface by sensation or inference, 1 
will the faculty ofjudgement perceive the magnitude of the body’s solidity by 
a second inference other than that used at the moment of vision. Similarly, the 
faculty ofjudgement can perceive the magnitude of every solid part of the 
body only by a second inference other than that used at the moment of vision. 
The magnitudes perceived by sight when it faces them are therefore only those 
of the surfaces and lines we have specified. 

[164] Now it has been shown that perception of magnitude is achieved by 
estimating the base of the radial cone surrounding that magnitude by the angle 
of the cone at the eye’s centre and by the length of the cone or distance of the 
visible magnitude. And it has been shown that some distances of visible 
objects are perceived with certainty while others are conjectural or uncertain, 
u ioia As for objects whose | distances are established, sight perceives their sizes by 
estimating them by the angles they subtend at the centre of the eye and by their 
established distances. Thus perception of the sizes of such objects will be 
ascertained. 1 But as for objects whose distances are conjectural or uncertain, 
sight perceives their sizes by estimating them by the angles they subtend at the 
eye’s centre and by their conjectural or uncertain distances. Thus perception of 
the sizes of such objects will be uncertain. When the percipient 2 wants tp 
ascertain the size of an object he moves the eye over its diameters thus causing 
the ray’s axis to move over all parts of the object. If the object is very distant a 
confused form of it will appear to the sense upon contemplating it and the 
percipient will realize the uncertainty of its magnitude. If, however, the object 
11 102b lies at a moderate distance, | the sense-faculty will realize upon contemplating 
it that it is correctly seen. When the ray’s axis moves over such an object, it 
will survey it, perceiving its parts one by one and ascertaining their magni- 
tudes, and by means of this motion it will ascertain the magnitude of the part 
of the sentient organ in which the object’s form occurs and the size of the angle 
of the surrounding cone which this part subtends. When [the percipient] 
wants to ascertain the object’s distance he moves the sight over the body 
extending along this distance, and by means of this motion he will grasp the 
magnitude of this body which is sensibly equal to the radial lines which are 
equal to the object’s distance. When the percipient ascertains the magnitude of 


1 88 


Optics 


the object’s distance and of the angle contained by the cone surrounding the 
object, he will grasp the object’s magnitude. 

[165] But the axis, as it moves over the object’s parts, does not leave its 
central position and move separately over those parts, for it has been shown 
that this line always rectilinearly extends to the bend in the nerve where the 

1 103a eye is set and that it maintains its position relative to the eye. | Rather, the eye 
moves as a whole before the object so that the middle of the sensitive area in it 
may face each one of the object’s parts. The axis will then pass over every part 
of the object, allowing the form of each part it reaches to extend on it to the eye 
while maintaining its position relative to the whole eye, and will bend only 
when the eye as a whole turns at the point in the nerve placed in the concavity 
of the bone. 

[166] When the eye turns to contemplate the object, beginning at one end of 
it, the extremity of the axis will be at that extreme part, so that the greater part 
of the object’s form will lie to one side of the axis on a portion of the eye’s 
surface, and only the form of the part encountered by the axis will occur in the 

: 103 b middle of the eye where the axis is; | the rest of the [total] form will lie to one 

| side of the axis. Then, when the sight subsequently moves over a diameter 1 of 

the object, the axis will move from that part to the next one on the diameter, 
and now the form of the first part will be displaced in the opposite direction to 
that in which the axis moved. The form will continue to recede from the axis 
as the latter moves over the diameter until it reaches the extreme part of the 
object opposite the first, so that the form of the whole object will now lie on 
the opposite side of its first position, except for the last extreme part which 
will be on the axis and in the middle of the eye. The axis will, throughout this 
motion, maintain its position relative to the eye; its motion will be extremely 
quick and, on account of this, mostly insensible; it will not, during this 
motion, coincide with the limits of the angle subtended by the object at the 
104a eye’s centre, | nor will it sweep the width of the angle subtended by a diameter 
of the object, for this would happen only if the axis moved separately while 
the eye as a whole remained stationary — which is not possible since the axis 
moves only by the motion of the whole eye when it contemplates the object. 
The sentient therefore perceives the size of the angle subtended by the object at 
the eye’s centre only from perceiving the magnitude of the part of the eye’s 
surface in which the object’s form occurs and from the image formed of the 
angle subtended by that part at the eye’s centre. 

[167] Now it is in the nature of the sense of sight to perceive the magnitudes 
of the parts of the eye where the form occurs and to imagine the angles 
subtended by those parts. And it is through the eye’s movement while 
contemplating the object that the sentient ascertains the object’s form and size; 
for through this motion it perceives every part of the object by the middle of 


II. 3 189 

the eye where the axis is, and through this motion the object’s form moves on 
the eye’s surface, thus bringing about the alteration 1 of the parts on the eye’s 

; . ;i b surface | occupied by the form as it moves from one part to another. Whenever 
the sentient perceives the part of the object at the extremity of the axis, it also 
perceives the whole object together with the whole part on the eye’s surface 
where the form of the whole object occurs, and also perceives the magnitude 
of that part and of the angle subtended by it at the eye’s centre. Perception of 
the size of the angle subtended by the object will then be repeated as a result oi 
the scanning motion, and by means of this repetition the sentient will identify 
the size of the angle, the form of the object and the form of its distance; the 
faculty of judgement will comprehend the size of the angle and of the distance, 
and from both of these it will perceive the size of the object with certainty. It is 
in this manner, therefore, that sight contemplates visible objects and the 
percipient ascertains their sizes by contemplation. 

[168] Moreover, when sight perceives the magnitudes of the radial lines 
extending between the eye and the limits of the object or those of the parts ot 

11 105a the object’s surface, it will sense their equality or inequality. | If the perceived 
surface or interval is inclined, sight will sense their inclination by sensing the 
inequality of the distances of their extremities [from the eve]. But if the surface 
or interval is frontal, sight will sense their frontality by sensing the equality of 
the distances of their extremities. And when sight senses the inclination or 
frontality of an interval, the faculty of judgement will not mistake its size; 
because it will perceive the inclination of the cone containing the interval by 
perceiving the unequal distances of the interval’s extremities, and conse- 
quently will sense the difference in the size of the cone’s base owing to its 
inclination. The size of an inclined magnitude will be confused with that of a 
frontal one only if estimation is made by means of the angle alone. No 
confusion in regard to size will occur if estimation is based on both the angle 
and the lengths of the radial lines between the eye and the object’s extremities. 

[169] Sight therefore perceives the magnitudes of inclined lines, surfaces 
and intervals from its perception of the magnitudes of the unequal distances 

11 105b [from it] of their extremities. But | the maximum moderate distance with 
regard to an inclined visible object will be smaller than it is with regard to the 
same object when frontally oriented. For the moderate distance with regard to 
a [given] object is that from which there does not disappear a part of the object 
bearing an appreciable ratio to the whole. 1 But when the object is inclined, the 
angle contained by the two rays issuing from the eye 2 to a part of the object 
may be smaller 3 than the angle contained by the rays going to that same part 
and at the same distance when the object is placed frontally to the eye. Thus a 
part bearing an appreciable ratio to the whole object may, when the latter is 
inclined, become invisible at a smaller distance than that at which the same 


190 


Optics 


[Perception of Separation] 


II. 3 


191 


part will disappear when the object is frontally placed. If that is so, then at that 
moderate distance from which a part bearing an appreciable ratio to the whole 
object will not disappear when the object is frontally oriented, an equal part of 

ii io6a the object may disappear | when the object is inclined. The maximum 
moderate distance with regard to an inclined object is therefore smaller than it 
is with respect to the same object when frontally placed. An inclined object 
will disappear as a whole at a smaller distance than that at which it will 
disappear in the frontal position, and its magnitude will [appear to be] smaller 
at a smaller distance than that at which it will look [equally] small when 
frontally placed. 

[170] Magnitudes which are ascertainable by sight are, therefore, those 
whose moderate distances extend along ordered and continuous bodies: sight 
perceives them by estimating them by the angles of the radial cones that 
surround them and by the lengths of the radial lines which are the distances of 
their extremities [from the eye). Moderate distances with regard to a given 
visible object vary according to the object's position in respect of inclination 
and frontalitv. Angles are accurately ascertained by means of the sight’s 
motion over the diameters of the object's surface and over the interval whose 
magnitude it desires to know. Distance is accurately ascertained by means of 

11 lor.h the sight’s motion ) over the bodies 1 that lie along the distances of the 
extremities of that surface or interval. In general, if the object is at a moderate 
distance that extends along a series of continuous bodies, its form together 
with the form of its distance will figure in the imagination at the moment of 
seeing the object, provided that the eye perceives the body that extends along 
the distance as it perceives the object. When the form of the object together 
with the form of its ascertained distance figure in the imagination, the faculty 
ofjudgement will perceive the object’s size according to the magnitude of the 
form of its ascertained distance which accompanies the object’s form. Only 
the magnitudes of such objects can be perceived with certainty by the sense of 
sight. Sight perceives the sizes of familiar visible objects at familiar distances 
by recognition, and it perceives the magnitudes of their distances by com- 
paring the sizes of the objects as perceived by recognition with the angles 
subtended by them at the eye’s centre at the moment of perceiving them. 

11 107a These are the ways | in which the sense of sight perceives the sizes of visible 
objects. 

[171] As for the reason why a very remote object appears to be smaller than 
its real size, or why the magnitude of a very close object appears larger than it 
really is — these are matters that belong with the errors of vision and we shall 
therefore clarify and explain them when we discuss visual errors. 1 


[172] As for the separation of visible objects, sight perceives it from the 
separation of the two forms produced in the eye for the two separate bodies 
that are seen. But for any two separate bodies, there either appears in the gap 
between them a light or a shining coloured body, or the gap is dark and does 
not show what lies behind it. When sight perceives two separate bodies, and 
their forms occur in it, the form of the light which appears in the gap between 
them, or the form of the coloured body which is visible there, or the form of 

-b the darkness which exists in | that gap, will occur in that part of the eye which 
lies between the two forms produced in the eye for the two separate bodies. 
But light, colour or darkness may exist in a body that may lie between the two 
bodies so as to be continuous with them. Thus if sight does not sense that the 
light, colour or darkness in the place of separation does not exist in a body that 
is continuous with the two bodies on either side of it, then sight will not sense 
the separation of the two bodies. Also, the surface of each of the two separate 
bodies will bend back at the place of separation, and this bending of the 
surfaces of the bodies, or of the surface of one of them, may or may not be 
visible to the eye. If the bending of the surfaces of the two bodies, or of the 
surface of one of them, is visible, then sight will, in consequence, sense the 
separation of the two bodies. Sight therefore perceives the separation ot 
bodies by perceiving one of the things we have mentioned: i.e. either by 
perceiving the light at the place of separation while sensing that that light 
comes from behind the surfaces of the two separate bodies; or by perceiving a 
:i io.m coloured body | at the place of separation while sensing that that body is other 
than either of the two separate bodies; or by perceiving at the place of 
separation a darkness which the faculty ofjudgement perceives to be darkness, 
not a body that is continuous with the two bodies; or by perceiving the 
bending in each of the surfaces of the two bodies at the place of separation or the 
bending in the surface of one of them. Thus all that sight perceives of the 
separation of bodies is perceived by inference from one or more of these things. 

[173] Now separation may exist between two disjunct bodies or between 
two bodies that join in some of their parts but not in others, such as fingers, the 
limbs of animals, many walls, and the branches of trees. In either case, sight 
will perceive separation only in the ways we have shown, whether the 
separate bodies are entirely disjunct or joined in some parts and disjunct in 
others. Sight may perceive the separation of bodies by recognition and by 

:i prior knowledge, but this perception is not | due to the sensation in the eye. 

[174] The separation of bodies may be wide and large or it may be narrow 
and small. Wide separation is not in most cases inapparent to the eye or 
mistaken by it because of the visibility of the body that is in line with the gap 


192 


Optics 


193 


and because of sight’s sensing of that body and of the fact that it is not the same 
as either of the two separate bodies, or because of perceiving a light or a 
luminous space aligned with the gap. Sight, however, can perceive only a 
small [degree of] separation, such as narrow creases, from a distance at which a 
body equal in magnitude to the degree of separation does not disappear. But if 
the separation of two bodies is narrow and inapparent, and the distance of the 
bodies from the eye is one at which bodies equal in magnitude to the width of 
separation become invisible, then sight will not perceive their separation even 
if the two bodies are moderately far from the eye and sight has a true 
perception of them. For a moderate distance is that from which there does not 
disappear a magnitude bearing a sensible ratio to the magnitude of the whole 
distance; and true perception is that between which and the real object there 
109a does not exist a sensible difference | with regard to the eye as a whole. The 
width of separation may not be of a magnitude that bears a sensible ratio to the 
object’s distance nor of a sensible magnitude in relation to each of the two 
separate bodies, for separation may be of such a magnitude that a hair or 
something similar can hide it; but this condition does not obliterate the 
| existence of separation, since the distances from which sight perceives separ- 

ation vary with the magnitude of the separation. Sight therefore perceives 
separation in the ways we have shown. 

[Perception of Continuity] 

[175] As for continuity, sight perceives it from the absence ofseparation. So 
that sight will perceive the continuity of a body if it does not sense any 
separation in it. If a hidden separation exists in the body, and sight does not 
perceive it, then sight will perceive that body to be continuous, despite the 
separation which exists in it. Sight therefore perceives continuity from the 
absence of separation. 

[176] Sight also perceives contiguity, and differentiates between contiguity 
and continuity, by perceiving the juxtaposition of the edges of two bodies 
while knowing that each of the bodies is disjunct from the other. Sight cannot 

109b pass a judgement as to contiguity except with the knowledge | that the two 
contiguous bodies are not one, but are disjunct from one another, for 
something that looks like disjunction of contiguous bodies may exist in 
continuous ones. The sentient will thus not sense contiguity and will assert 
continuity if it does not sense that each of the contiguous bodies is apart from 
the other and disjunct from it. 

[Perception of Number] 

[177] Sight perceives number by inference from the things numbered. For 
sight may perceive several separate objects all together at the same time. And 


II. 3 

when sight perceives the separate objects and perceives their separation, then 
it will perceive that each of them is not the same as the other. And having 
perceived that, it will perceive multiplicity. And when it perceives multi- 
plicity, the faculty of judgement will perceive number from the multiplicity. 
Number is therefore perceived by the sense of sight when sight perceives 
several separate objects, provided that it perceives them simultaneously and 
perceives their separation and that each is different from the other. It is in these 
ways, then, that sight perceives number. 

[Perception of Motion] 

[178] As for motion, sight perceives it by inference from comparing the 
moving object with other visible objects. | For when sight perceives a moving 
object together with [other] visible objects, it perceives the position of the 
object in relation to the others and its alignment with them. If the object is 
moving, but those objects do not share in the same motion, then the position 
of that object will vary in relation to those objects while in motion. And if 
sight perceives it together with those objects and perceives its position with 
respect to them, then it will perceive the object’s motion. Sight therefore 
perceives motion by perceiving the varying position of the [moving] object in 
relation to other objects. 

[179] Sight perceives motion in one of three ways: by comparing the 
moving object with other objects, or with a single object, or with the eye 
itself. As for comparing the moving object with several objects, when sight 
perceives the moving object and perceives it [first] in line with some object, 

11 1 10b then perceives it in line with another object, | while the eye maintains the same 
position, it will sense the motion of that object. As for comparing the moving 
object with a single object, let sight perceive the moving object and its 
position relative to another object, then let it perceive the change in the 
object’s position relative to that other object itself, either by receding farther 
from or drawing closer to it, or by changing sides in relation to that object, 
while the eye maintains the same position, or by a change in the position of 
some parts or parts of the moving object relative to that object (and it is in this 
last manner that sight perceives the motion of a rotating object when 
compared with another object) — if sight perceives the change in position of 
the moving object, or of its parts, or of one part of it, in relation to another 
object, then it will perceive the motion of the moving object. 

11 nia | [180] As for comparing the moving object with the eye itself, when sight 

perceives the moving object, then it perceives its direction and distance. If the 
eye is stationary while the object moves, then the object’s position will move 
relative to the eye. If the motion of the object takes place on a frontally 
oriented interval, then the object’s direction will change and sight will sense 



194 


Optics 


i95 


the change in its direction. If sight senses the change in the object’s direction 
while the eye is stationary, it will sense the object’s motion. If the motion of 
the object takes place on the line extending between it and the eye, the motion 
being away from or towards the eye, then the object will recede from or 
approach the eye. As the fixed eye senses the object’s moving away from or 
towards it, sight will sense the object’s motion. If the object’s motion is 
rotatory, then that part of it facing the eye will not remain the same. And if the 
parts of the object facing the eye change, and sight senses their change while 
the eye maintains its position, then it will sense the object’s motion. It is in 
these ways, then, that sight perceives | motion when it maintains the same 
position. 

[181] Sight may perceive motion in any one of these ways even if the eye 
moves. This happens when sight senses the varying position of the moving 
object while sensing that that variation is not due to the eye’s motion. There is 
a difference in condition between the variation in position that happens to that 
object on account of its own motion and the variation in position that happens 
to it on account of the eye’s motion. Thus, when sight senses the varying 
position of the moving object, and senses that the variation in the object’s 
position is not due to the eye’s motion, it will sense the object’s motion. The 
form of the object may move in the eye as a result of the object’s motion, but 
sight will not perceive the object’s motion merely through the motion of its 
form in the eye. Rather, sight perceives motion only by comparing the 
moving object to other objects in the way we have shown. For the form of a 
stationary object may move | in the eye while the object is at rest, but sight will 
net in consequence of this perceive the object to be in motion. For if the eye 
moves in front of visible objects while they are being contemplated, the form 
of every one of the objects facing the eye, whether they are stationary or in 
motion, will move on the surface of the eye as the latter moves. But sight has 
become accustomed to the motion of the objects’ forms on its surface when 
the objects are stationary, and therefore does not judge the object to be in 
motion on account of the motion of its form, unless the form of another object 
occurs in the eye and sight perceives the varying position of the moving 
object’s form relative to the form of the other object, or unless a succession of 
forms takes place in the eye as a result of the rotary motion. Sight does not 
therefore perceive motion except in the ways we have detailed. 

[182] Sight perceives the motion of an object and the mode of that motion. 

Its perception of motion takes place in the ways we have mentioned. As to its 
perception of the mode of motion, this results from perceiving | the interval 
on which the object moves, provided the object moves as a whole. Sight 
ascertains the mode of motion if it ascertains the shape of the distance on M n 4 a 

which the object moves. If the object moves about itself in a circle, sight will 


II. 3 

perceive the circularity of its motion from perceiving the succession of those 
of its parts that face the eye or the succession of parts facing some visible 
object, or from the fact that one of its parts comes into line with different 
objects one after another, or with parts of a single object one part after 
another, while the eye as a whole retains the same position. 

[183] If the motion of the object is compounded of rotation and displace- 
ment over some interval, sight will perceive that motion to be composite from 
perceiving the succession of parts of the moving object in consequence of that 
motion in relation to the eye or to some other object together with perceiving 
the whole object’s displacement or change ol place. It is in these ways, then, 

[I ! I3 a that sight perceives the modes of motion j of visible objects. 

[184] Sight can perceive motion only in time, for motion, and every part of 
motion, must take place in time. Now sight perceives the motion of an object 
only by perceiving the object in two different places or positions. And an 
object’s position can vary only in time, and an object can be in two different 
places and in two different positions only at two different moments. And if 
sight perceives the object in two different places or positions, then its 
perception of the object in the two places or positions must take place at two 
different moments. But a certain duration must exist between any two 
different moments, and therefore sight can perceive motion only in time. 

[185] We say, then, that the time in which sight perceives the motion must 
be sensible. For sight perceives motion only by perceiving the object in two 
different places one after the other, or in two different positions one after the 
other. When, therefore, sight perceives the moving object in the second place 

11 1 13b without perceiving it [ at that moment in the first place where it was formerly 
perceived, the sentient will sense that the moment at which it perceived the 
object in the second place is not the same as that at which it perceived it in the 
first place. Having perceived that, it will perceive the difference of the two 
moments. The case is similar when sight perceives the motion by perceiving 
the difference in position of the moving object. For if sight perceives the 
moving object in the second position without at that moment perceiving it in 
the first position where it was formerly perceived, then it will sense the 
difference between the two moments. And if it senses that difference, then it 
will sense the time between them. That being the case, the time in which sight 
perceives the motion must be sensible. 

[186] Having explained all these things in detail let us sum up what has been 
shown regarding them, and say that sight perceives motion by perceiving the 
moving visible object in two different positions at two different moments 
separated by a sensible time. That is the way in which sight perceives motion. 

[187] Sight | perceives the inequality or equality of motions in quickness or 
slowness by perceiving the intervals on which the moving objects move. If 


196 


Optics 


197 


sight perceives two moving objects together with the intervals on which they 
move, and if it senses that one of the intervals covered by the two moving 
objects in the same time is larger than the other, then it will sense the quickness 
of the object that has covered the larger interval. If the intervals covered by the 
two objects in the same time, or in two equal times, are equal, and sight senses 
their equality, then it will sense the equality of the two motions. Again, if it 
senses the equality of the intervals together with the inequality of the times of 
the two motions, then it will sense the quickness of the moving object that has 
covered the interval in a shorter time. And again, if the two moving objects 
cover two equal intervals in equal times, and sight perceives the equality of 
times and of intervals, then it will sense the equality of the two motions. We 
have now shown how sight perceives motions and how | it discerns motions 
and how it perceives their modes, their equality and inequality. 

(Perception of Rest] 

[188] As for rest, sight perceives it by perceiving the visible object in the 
same place and position for a sensible time. If sight perceives the object in the 
same place and position at two different moments separated by a sensible 
time, then it will perceive the object as stationary during that amount of time. 
Sight perceives the position of a stationary object in relation to other objects 
and in relation to the eye itself. In this manner, then, sight perceives the being 
at rest of visible objects. 

[Perception of Roughness] 

[189] As for roughness, sight perceives it in most cases from the light that 
appears on the surface of the rough body. For roughness is a difference in 
position of the parts of the object’s surface, so that some parts of the surface are 
protruding and others depressed. And if the parts of an object’s surface differ 
in position, then when light shines upon that surface the protruding parts will 
in most cases cast shadows | on the depressed ones. When light reaches the 
sunken parts, it will be accompanied by shadows cast by some of the lights. 
Whereas the protruding parts, being exposed to the light, are not hidden from 
the light that occurs in that surface. But if shadows occur in the depressed 
parts, while the protruding parts are now shadowed, then the form of the light 
will vary over the surface of that body. On the other hand, the parts of a 
smooth surface are similarly situated, so that when light shines upon it the 
form of the light will be similar over the whole surface. Now sight recognizes 
the form of the light on rough surfaces and the form of the light upon smooth 
ones as a result of having frequently looked at rough and smooth surfaces. If, 
therefore, sight senses the light in the surface of a body to be of the quality it 
has been accustomed to [see] in rough bodies, it will judge the surface of that 


II- 3 

. , , -b body to be rough. | If, however, it senses the light in the body’s surface to be of 

the quality it has been accustomed to [see] in smooth surfaces, it will judge the 
surface of that body to be smooth. Sight, therefore, perceives roughness in 
most cases from the form of the light which it perceives in the surface of the 
rough body. 

[190] If roughness is excessive, the protruding parts will be fairly large. In 
the case of such surfaces sight will perceive the protruding parts together with 
their protrusion, and the difference in position of the parts of that body’s 
surface, by perceiving the separation between the parts. Having perceived the 
difference in position of the parts of the body’s surface, sight will perceive its 
roughness without the need to examine the light. 

[191] Again, if light shines upon a body which is excessively rough, the 
ii 1 16a form of the light in its surface will vary a great deal, and, if it does, | the 

separation of parts and the difference in their positions will be visible, and the 
body’s roughness will be apparent. If the light radiates on the rough body 
from the side opposite the rough surface, and the light is strong, and no 
variation in the form of the light appears on the body’s surface, sight will not 
perceive the roughness of such a body unless it perceives its parts distinctly 
and perceives the protrusion of some of them and the depression of others. If 
such a body is excessively rough, sight will in most cases perceive its distinct 
parts, the difference in their positions, and the roughness of the body. If the 
body is slightly rough, the depressed parts and pores in it being extremely 
small, then its roughness will not in most cases be visible to the eye if the light 
radiating upon the body is strong and no variation of its form appears in the 
surface of the body. Sight will not perceive the roughness of such a body 
except when it is very close and the parts of the body’s surface are contem- 
11 n 6 b plated. | When the parts of such a body are distinctly visible to the eye as 
protruding or depressed, then sight will perceive its roughness, but not when 
the body’s parts or their depression are not distinctly visible. Sight, therefore, 
perceives roughness by perceiving the difference in position of the parts of the 
body’s surface, or from the form of the light which sight has been accustomed to 
[see] in the surfaces of rough bodies. Sight may infer roughness from the lack of 
polish, and so will judge a body to be rough when it senses no polish in it. But 
sight frequently errs when it infers roughness from this condition, for a surface 
may be polished without appearing to be so except from a special position. 

[Perception of Smoothness] 

[192] As for smoothness, which is evenness of the surface of a body, sight 
perceives it in most cases from the form of the light which appears in*the 
surface of the smooth body, and which sight has been accustomed to [see] in 

ii t t?a smooth surfaces. | If the light in the surface of the body is of similar form, sight 


Optics 


199 


198 

will infer smoothness of the surface from it. Sight may also perceive smooth- 
ness by contemplation, for when it contemplates the surface of a smooth body 
it will perceive the flatness and evenness of its parts and, consequently, 
perceive the smoothness of the surface. 

[193] As for polish, which is being very smooth, sight perceives it from the 
glitter and shine of the light in the body’s surface. Sight perceives the state of 
being polished and very smooth in no other way than from the glitter and 
shine of the light in the body’s surface. For it perceives smoothness by 
perceiving the evenness of the surface. And in most cases it perceives evenness 
of surface from the similarity of the form of the light in the body’s surface, and 
it may perceive it by contemplation. Polish is perceived by sight from the 
shine of the light in the body’s surface and from the position according to 
which the light is reflected. 

[194] Roughness and smoothness may exist together in the same surface. 

11 [ 17b This is the case when there exist in the surface of the body | variously situated 

parts some of which are protruding and others depressed, and the parts of the 
surface of each or some of the variously situated protruding or depressed parts 
are flat and similarly situated, so that the surface as a whole is rough, while its 
parts or some of them are smooth and polished. Sight perceives the roughness 
of such a surface by perceiving the difference in position of the protruding and 
depressed parts; and the smoothness and polish of parts will be visible from 
the forms of the light which sight perceives in the parts’ surfaces. Sight may 
also perceive the smoothness of such parts by contemplation, i.e. by perceiv- 
ing the flatness of the surface of each of them. It is in these ways that sight 
perceives smoothness, polish and roughness. 

[Perception of Transparency] 

[195] As for transparency, sight perceives it by perceiving what lies behind 
the transparent body. But sight does not perceive the transparency of a 
transparent body unless the body has some opacity in it, and unless its opacity 

11 usa is denser than the transparency of the air mediating | between it and the eye. 

But if the body is perfectly transparent, sight will neither perceive nor sense its 
transparency, but will only perceive what lies behind it. If the body has some 
opacity in it, sight will perceive it on account of its opacity, and will perceive 
its transparency by perceiving what lies behind it, for a light or a shining 
coloured body will appear behind a transparent body and sight will sense it. 
Sight does not sense the transparency of a body, when it senses what lies 
behind it, unless it senses that the light and colour it perceives through the 
transparent body is a light and colour that exist behind that body and not the 
colour and light of the body itself. If it does not perceive the light and colour as 
lying behind the transparent body, then it will not perceive the transparency 


II. 3 

of the transparent body. If no light or shining body exists behind the 
transparent body or on any side of it, and no light or colour appears behind it 
or on any side of it, then sight will not sense the transparency | of that body. 
This happens when the transparent body adjoins an opaque body of a dark 
colour which surrounds it or is in line with it on every side — sight [in this 
case] will not sense the transparency of such a body. 

[196] Again, if a dark place exists behind the transparent body, so that no 
light appears behind it, and the opaque body lying behind the transparent 
body is of a bright colour, and if the light in the transparent body reaches the 
opaque body and the colour of that opaque body becomes visible, then sight 
will perceive the transparency of such a transparent body if it senses that the 
colour it perceives behind it is the colour of another body and not of the 
transparent body. And if it senses that, then it will sense the transparency of 
the transparent body. Again, if the transparent body is of limited trans- 

„> parency , and the bodies behind and around it | are dimly lit, then sight will not 

perceive its transparency unless it looks through it, with a strong light having 
been placed on the opposite side, and, sensing the light behind it, will perceive 
its transparency. In these manners, then, sight perceives the transparency of 
transparent bodies. 

[Perception of Opacity] 

[197] As for opacity, sight perceives it from the absence of transparency. So 
that, when sight perceives a body without sensing any transparency in it, it 
will judge it to be opaque. Opacity, indeed, is the absence of transparency. 

[Perception of Shadow] 

[198] As for shadow, light perceives it by comparison with neighbouring 
lights or with lights of which it previously had knowledge. For shadow is the 
absence of some lights while the shadowed place is being illuminated with a 
light other than that absent light. If sight senses the shadowed place together 
with neighbouring bodies, and if these bodies are illuminated with a stronger 

• ^ light than the light in the place of the shadow, then it will sense | that place as 
shadowed in relation to the strong light on the neighbouring bodies. Simi- 
larly, if it senses a certain light in one place from which sunlight or some other 
strong light that exists at that time is absent, then it will sense that place to be 
shadowed in relation to the sunlight or the strong light. Sight may sense the 
shadowing body, or it may not immediately discern it. But if sight perceives a 
dimly lit place, and perceives the light on neighbouring bodies to be. stronger 
than that dim light, it will perceive shadow in that place. It is in these ways that 
sight perceives shadow. 


14 


L. 


200 


Optics 


201 


120a 


120b 


1212 


[Perception of Darkness] 

[199] As for darkness, sight perceives it by inference from the absence of 
light. For darkness is the total absence of light. Where, therefore, sight 
perceives a certain place without perceiving any light in it, it will sense 
darkness. Darkness is perceived by the sentient from lack of sensation | of 
light. 

[Perception of Beauty] 

[200] Now for the beauty that is perceptible to the sense of sight: sight 
perceives it by perceiving each one of the particular properties of which the 
manner of perception by sight has been shown. For each of these properties 
separately produces one of the kinds of beauty, 1 and they produce [other] 
kinds of beauty in conjunction with one another. For sight perceives beauty 
only from the forms of visible objects which are perceptible to it; and these 
forms are composed of the particular properties that have been shown in 
detail; and sight perceives the forms from its perception of these properties; 
and, therefore, it perceives beauty from its perception of these properties. 

[201] Now the kinds of beauty that sight perceives from the forms of 
visible objects are many: some have as cause one of the particular properties 
in the form; others are caused by a number of the particular properties in the 
form; others still are caused by a conjunction of the properties one with 
another, and not by the properties themselves; | and the cause of others again 
is composed of the properties and their harmony. Sight perceives each one of 
the properties in each one of the forms singly, and it perceives them in 
composition, and perceives their conjunction and harmony. It therefore 
perceives beauty in various ways, all of which reduce to perception of the 
particular properties. 

[202] That it is these particular properties that separately produce beauty — 
and by ‘producing beauty’ I mean that they produce in the soul an effect such 
that the form appears beautiful — will be evident from a brief consideration. 
For light produces beauty, and thus the sun, the moon, and the stars look 
beautiful, without there being in them a cause on account of which their form 
looks beautiful and appealing other than their radiant light. Therefore, light 
by itself produces beauty. 

[203] Colour also produces beauty. For every bright colour, such as purple, 
purpure, vegetable-green, | rose, sa'wx- red, and the like, 1 appeal to the 
beholder and please the eye. Similarly, dyed clothes and covers and utensils, 
also flowers, blossoms and meadows, are felt to be beautiful. Therefore colour 
by itself produces beauty. 

[204] Distance, too, may produce beauty by accident. For some apparently 
beautiful forms may have marks, wrinkles, or pores that mar them and 


II. 3 

perturb their beauty. But when moved farther from the eye, these minute 
marring features disappear, and the beauty of the form stands out. Similarly, 
many beautiful-looking forms possess certain refinements, such as minute 
designs or outlines or ordering [of parts] which account for the beauty of the 
form. Many of these features may not appear to the eye from moderate 
, 2I b distances, but when brought closer to it they become | visible and the beauty 
of the form becomes manifest. Thus increasing or diminishing the distance 
[from the eye] may cause beauty to appear, and, therefore, distance by itself 
produces beauty. 

[205] Position produces beauty, and many things that look beautiful do so 
only because of order and position. Beautiful writing also is regarded as such 
because of order alone. For the beauty of writing is due only to the soundness 
of the shapes of letters and their composition among themselves, so that when 
the composition and order of the letters is not regular and proportionate the 
writing will not be beautiful, even though the shapes of individual letters may 
be correct and sound. Indeed, writing is considered beautiful when of regular 
composition, even though the letters in it are not quite sound. Similarly, 
many forms of visible objects are felt to be beautiful and appealing only 
because of the composition and order of their parts among themselves. 

[206] Solidity produces beauty, and thus the full-grown bodies of individ- 
II 122 a ual human beings and of many | animals are considered beautiful. 

[207] Shape produces beauty, and thus a crescent moon looks beautiful. 
The beautiful forms of individual human beings and of many individual 
animals, trees and plants look beautiful only on account of their shapes and the 
shapes of the parts of [their] form. 

[208] Size produces beauty, and that is why the moon is more beautiful than 
any one of the stars, and the larger stars are more beautiful than the smaller. . 

[209] Separateness produces beauty. Thus dispersed stars are more beauti- 
ful than nebulae and the Milky Way. And that is also why separated lamps or 
candles are more beautiful than a continuously collected fire. For this reason, 
too, blossoms and flowers dispersed in meadows look more beautiful than 
when they are gathered and crowded together. 

[210] Continuity produces beauty. Thus meadows with continuous and 
dense vegetation are more beautiful than those in which the vegetation is 
interrupted and discontinuous. And of the meadows that look beautiful 
because of their colours, those which are continuous are more beautiful than 
the others. The additional beauty in these is produced by continuity alone. 

n 122 b | [21 1] Number produces beauty, and so portions of the sky with many 

stars are more beautiful than those with few stars. And for this reason, too, 
lamps and candles look beautiful when many of them are gathered in one 
place. 


202 


Optics 


[ 212 ] Motion produces beauty; hence the beauty of dancing, and of the 
movements of the dancer, and of many of the gestures and movements of man 
in speech and in action. 

[213] Rest produces beauty, and therefore gravity and staidness 1 appear 
beautiful. 

[2x4] Roughness produces beauty. Thus many rough clothes and covers 
look beautiful; and for this reason many of the goldsmith’s artifacts become 
beautiful by having their surfaces roughened and textured. 

[215] Smoothness produces beauty, and therefore it is beautiful in cloth and 
utensils. 

[216] Transparency produces beauty, and therefore transparent precious 
stones and transparent utensils are felt to be beautiful. 

[217] Opacity produces beauty, for colours, lights, shapes, outlines, and all 
beautiful-looking features that are seen in the forms of visible objects are 
perceptible to sight only on account of opacity. 

ii 123a [2l8] Shadow causes beauty to appear, | for many of the forms of visible 

objects have in them minute marks, wrinkles or pores which mar them and 
eclipse their beauty. So that when these objects are placed in the sun’s light or 
in some other strong lights, their marks and pores will be visible, thus causing 
their beautiful features to disappear. But when placed in the shadow or in faint 
lights their beautiful features become manifest as a result of the disappearance 
of those marring marks, wrinkles or pores. Again, the rainbow colours that 
appear in birds’ feathers and in the species called abu qalamun 1 only become 
visible in shadow or in subdued lights. 2 But when placed in sunlight or in 
other strong lights those rainbow colours and beautiful features which were 
visible in shadow and in subdued light become invisible. 

[219] Darkness causes beauty to appear. For the stars are visible only in 
darkness. And, similarly, the beauty of lamps, candles and fires only appears 
in the darkness of night or in darkened places, but not in daylight or in 

11 123b strong lights. And the stars are more beautiful in dark nights than in | 
moonlit nights. 

[220] Similarity produces beauty. For paired organs of an animal are 
beautiful only when they are similar. Thus if the eyes are of different shapes, as 
when one is round and the other elongated, they will be extremely ugly. They 
will also be found ugly if one is black and the other blue, 1 and likewise if one is 
larger than the other. And, again, if one cheek is sunken and the other bulging, 
both will look extremely ugly. In the same way, eyebrows are extremely ugly 
if one is thick and the other narrow; they will also look ugly if one is long and 
the other short. Thus all paired organs of animals are beautiful only when they 
are similar. Again, designs and the letters of a script are beautiful only when 
identical letters or parts are similar. 


L 


203 


II- 3 

[221] Dissimilarity produces beauty. For the shapes of animals’ organs are 
of dissimilar parts, and without this dissimilarity they would cease to be 
beautiful. A nose [e.g.] would look very ugly if it were of equal thickness from 

; . beginning to end; | its beauty is only due to the difference between its ends and 

to its conical shape. Likewise, eyebrows are beautiful only when they are 
narrower at the ends than elsewhere. When all the organs of animals are 
examined, their beauty will be found to be due to the difference in the shapes 
of their parts. And, similarly, designs and the letters of a script will not look 
beautiful if their parts are of equal thickness. For the extremities of letters and 
the ends of their deep curves 1 are beautiful only when they are narrow, that is, 
narrower than the remaining parts of the letters. A script would be very ugly if 
its letters were of equal thickness and of the same shape at their ends, middles, 
beginnings, junctions and joints. 2 Dissimilarity therefore produces beauty in 
many of the forms of visible objects. 

[222] It is therefore clear from what we have said that each of the particular 
visible properties we have shown in detail produces beauty by itself. If an 
inspection is made of them, every one of these properties will be found to 
produce beauty in many situations. We have mentioned only some of these as 
examples, so that inferences can be made from each ofthese examples to similar 
ones, and in order that they may be used as a guide towards a survey of similar 

11 124b cases by whoever wishes to investigate | the manner in which these properties 
affect beautiful-looking forms. These properties, however, do not produce 
beauty in all situations, nor does any of them produce it in every form in which 
they occur, but in some forms rather than others. Magnitude, for example, does 
not produce beauty in every body of a sizable magnitude. Nor does the same 
colour produce beauty in every body in which this colour exists. Similarly, not 
every shape produces beauty. Thus each one of the particular properties we 
have mentioned can singly produce beauty, but in some situations rather than 
others and under certain conditions to the exclusion of others. 

[223] Now these properties also produce beauty by being joined with one 
another. For a beautiful script is one whose letters have beautiful-looking 
shapes and are in beautiful composition with one another 1 — which is perfect 
beauty in a script. Thus a script which combines these two properties is more 
beautiful than one which has one of them without the other. Perfect beauty in 
a script comes only from the conjunction 2 of shape and position. 

11 125a [224] Similarly, bright and pure colours j and designs are more beautiful 

when regularly and uniformly ordered than when they have no regular order. 
Again, beauty may appear in forms of individual men and animals on account 
of the combination of particular properties in them. For eyes of moderate size 
and almond shape are more beautiful than eyes having only one or the other of 


204 


Optics 


205 


! these properties. Similarly, cheeks which are both flat and of delicate colour 

are more beautiful than cheeks that are flat but of pale colour or those that are 
bulging and of delicate colour. Again, roundness of face and delicate colour 
are together more beautiful than when one of them is without the other. 
Similarly, a small mouth with thin and moderately sized lips is more beautiful 
than one that is small with thick lips or one that is wide with thin lips. This 
state of affairs is, therefore, most certain. 

[225] Thus if a survey is made of beautiful-looking forms in all visible 
objects, the conjunction of particular properties will be found to produce in 
them kinds of beauty not brought about by any single one of these proper- 

1 125b ties. | And most of the beauty perceived by the sense of sight consists in the 
combination of these properties with one another. Therefore the particular 
properties we have mentioned produce beauty individually and in combina- 
tion with one another. 

[226] Now beauty may consist in something other than either of the two 
things we have mentioned, and that is proportionality and harmony. 1 For the 

| various organs and parts of which forms are composed 2 may differ in respect 

of shape, size or position, or in respect of their contiguity and separateness, 
and thus a number of particular properties may occur in each of the forms 
without these properties being all proportionate and harmonious. 3 For not 
every shape is beautiful with every shape, nor is every size beautiful with 
every size, nor every position with every position. Again, not every shape is 
beautiful in every size nor every size in every position, but rather each one of 
these particular properties is proportionate to some properties and dispropor- 
tionate to others, and every magnitude is proportionate to some magnitudes 
and disproportionate to others. For example, an aquiline nose does not look 
1 126a beautiful together with sunken eyes, | nor do large eyes look beautiful with an 
excessively large nose; likewise, a protruding forehead with sunken eyes or a 
low forehead with prominent eyes do not appear beautiful. Thus every organ 
has a shape or shapes that make its form beautiful, and yet every shape of any 
one of the organs only agrees with some shapes of the other organs to the 
exclusion of others, and the beauty of the form results from the combination 
of shapes that are proportionate to the organs in it. 

[227] The same thing applies to the size, position and order of organs. For 
large eyes look beautiful when their beautiful shape combines with an aquiline 
nose whose moderate size is proportionate to that of the eyes. Also, the 
almond shape of eyes and the sweetness of that shape, even when the eyes are 
small, looks beautiful when combined in a face with a narrow nose of the right 
shape and size. Similarly, thin lips are beautiful in a small mouth, provided 
that the smallness of the mouth is proportionate to the thinness of the lips — I 


II. 3 

mean that they should not be extremely thin | when the mouth is not very 
small, but rather the mouth should be moderately small and the lips thin in 
addition to being proportionate to the size of the mouth. Similarly, a face 
looks beautiful when it is proportionate in width to the size of its organs — l 
mean that the face should not be very wide while its organs are small, i.e. 
disproportionate to the size of the face as a whole. For when the face is 
excessively large while its organs are small and disproportionate to its size, it 
does not look beautiful even if the organs are proportionate in magnitude to 
one another and their shapes are beautiful. Also, a face will be ugly-looking 
when it is small and narrow while its organs are large and disproportionate to 
its size. But the face will look beautiful when the organs are proportionate to 
each other and to the width of the face, even though each of the organs may 
not by itself be beautiful in shape or size. 

[228] Proportionality alone may produce beauty, provided that the organs 
II izjz are not in themselves ugly | though not perfect in their beauty. Thus when a 

form combines the beauty of the shapes of all of its parts and the beauty of their 
magnitudes and their composition and the proportionality of parts in regard 
to shape, size, position and all the other properties required by proportio- 
nality, and, moreover, when the organs are proportionate to the shape and 
size of the face as a whole — that is perfect beauty. A form that has some of 
these properties to the exclusion of others will be considered beautiful in 
accordance with what it has of the beautiful properties. 

[229] Writing also is not beautiful unless its letters are proportionate in 
respect of their shapes, magnitudes, positions and order. And the same is true 
of all visible objects which are combinations of various parts. 

[230] When, therefore, a survey is made of beautiful forms in all kinds of 
visible objects, proportionality will be found to produce in them a beauty 
other than that produced by any one of the particular properties by itself and 
other than that produced by the conjunction of the particular properties 

u 127b existing together | in the form. When the beautiful effects produced by the 
conjunction of particular properties are examined, the beauty due to that 
conjunction will be found to be only the result of the proportionality and 
harmony obtaining between those conjoined properties. 1 For beauty does not 
come about whenever these two or more particular properties come together, 
but only in some forms rather than others, owing to the proportion which 
brings harmony to the two or more properties combined in the form. 2 Beauty 
is, therefore produced by the particular properties, but its completion and 
perfection is due only to the proportionality and harmony 3 that may obtain 
between the particular properties. 

[231] It is clear from all that we have said that the beauty of forms 
perceived by the sense of sight is due only to the visible particular properties 


206 


Optics 


207 


11 128a 


11 128b 


;i 129a 


or to their conjunction or to their proportionality. For sight perceives the 
aforementioned properties either singly or in conjunction, | and it perceives 
the forms composed of them. So that when sight perceives a visible object in 
which there exists one of the aforementioned particular properties that singly 
produce beauty, and sight contemplates that property by itself, the form of 
that property will, after the contemplation, present itself to the sentient, and 
the faculty ofjudgement will perceive the beauty of the object in possession of 
this property. For the form of every visible object is composed of a number of 
the properties that we have shown in detail. When sight perceives the object 
without distinguishing the properties existing in it, and if one of these 
properties is such that it can produce [a sense of] beauty in the soul, then sight 
upon contemplating that property will perceive it by itself. And that percep- 
tion of the single property will occur in the sentient. And when perception of 
the form of the property that produces beauty occurs in the sentient, the 
faculty ofjudgement will perceive its beauty, | thereby perceiving the beauty 
of the object. Further, when sight perceives an object whose beauty consists in 
the conjunction of properties and in their proportionality, and it contemplates 
the object thus distinguishing and perceiving the properties that produce 
beauty by being conjoined or by being proportionate to one another, and this 
perception occurs in the sentient, and the faculty ofjudgement compares those 
properties with one another, then that faculty will perceive the beauty of the 
object that consists in the conjunction of the harmoniously combined proper- 
ties in it. Sight therefore perceives the beauty of visible objects by relating 
those properties to one another in the manner we have shown in detail. 

[Perception of Ugliness] 

[232] As for ugliness, it is a [property of the] form from which all beautiful 
properties are absent. For it has been shown that the particular properties 
produce beauty but not in every situation nor in every form, | but in some 
forms rather than others. Proportionality also exists not in all forms but in 
some rather than others. Therefore, beauty will be lacking from forms in 
which no particular properties produce beauty either singly or in conjunction, 
and in which no proportionality exists among the parts. Thus ugliness of form 
is the absence of beauty from it. There may exist in one and the same form 
both beautiful and ugly properties, and in this case sight will perceive their 
respective beauty and ugliness once it has distinguished and contemplated the 
properties in the form. But sight will perceive ugliness from the privation of 
beauty when perceiving forms from which all beautiful features are absent. 
And likewise for all ugly things. 


II. 4 

[Perception of Similarity] 

[233] The similarity perceived by sight is the identity of two forms or 
properties with respect to the thing in which they resemble one another. New 

: ,,b sight perceives forms and their properties | as they are. Thus when sight 
perceives at the same time two similar forms or properties, it will perceive 
their similarity from its perception of each one of the forms or properties, and 
from comparing each of the forms or properties with the other, and from its 
perception of their identity with regard to the thing in which they resemble 
one another. Sight therefore perceives similarity in similar forms or properties 
from its perception of each of the forms or properties and from comparing 
them with one another. 

[Perception of Dissimilarity] 

[234] As for dissimilarity, sight perceives it in the dissimilar forms from its 
perception of each one of the forms and from comparing one with the other 
and from its perception of the lack of identity in their appearance and in all the 
properties with respect to which they differ — I mean the sentient’s sensing of 
the lack of similarity between them. The sense of sight therefore perceives 
dissimilarity from its perception of each one of the forms or properties alone 
and from comparing them with one another and from the sentient's sensing of 

11 :30a the lack of identity | between them. 

[235] We have now shown the ways in which sight perceives each of the 
particular visible properties. And it appears from all that has preceded that, of 
the particular properties perceptible by the sense of sight, some are perceivedby 
pure sensation, others are perceived by recognition, and others still by analogy 
and inferences. 1 These are the matters we intended to show in this chapter. 

CHAPTER 4 

ON DISTINGUISHING [THE WAYS IN WHICH] SIGHT 
PERCEIVES VISIBLE OBJECTS 

[i] It has been shown how sight perceives each of the particular properties 
that are perceptible to the sense of sight. Now sight perceives only the forms 
of visible objects, and these [latter] are bodies. And the forms of visible objects 
are composed of the particular properties previously explained, such as shape, 
size, colour, position, order, and the like particular properties previously 
:i 1 30b described. Thus sight perceives each of the particular properties | from its 
perception of the forms of visible objects, which consist of the particular 
properties. And from each of the forms of visible objects, sight perceives the 


208 


Optics 


209 


particular properties in that form all at once. Thus sight does not perceive any 
of the particular properties by itself, because none of the previously described 
particular properties exists by itself, apart from the others. These properties 
exist only in bodies none of which possesses only one of the properties to the 
exclusion of the others, but rather every body combines a number of 
particular properties which are perceptible to the sense of sight. Sight, 
therefore, perceives only the forms of visible objects, and each of these forms 
is composed of a number of particular properties and, consequently, sight 
perceives in each of the forms of visible objects a multitude of particular 
properties [which are then distinguished] in the imagination and the faculty of 
judgement. 1 For, upon glancing at a visible object, sight perceives every one 

11 131a of the particular properties | in conjunction with the others; then, by distin- 
guishing the properties in the form, it perceives each of them separately. 

[2] It has also been shown in detail and with precision how sight perceives 
the forms of visible objects which are composed of the particular properties, 
this being a simultaneous perception of the particular properties collected in 
the form. Now some of the particular properties of which the forms of visible 
objects are composed appear at the moment when sight glances at the object, 
while others appear only after scrutiny and contemplation. Examples of the 
latter are minute designs, letters of a script, tattoo marks, wrinkles and the 
difference between closely similar colours. Indeed all fine features appear only 
after they have been scrutinized and contemplated, and not at the moment of 
noticing the visible object. Now the true form of a visible object which is 
perceived by the sense of sight is that constituted of all the particular 

11 131b properties | that sight can perceive in the form. And the true form of the visible 
object which can be perceived by sight is perceived by perception of all 
particular properties in the form of the object. That being so, sight will 
perceive the true form of a visible object in which fine detail exists, only after 
scrutiny and contemplation. 

[3] Further, if sight perceives subtle properties only after scrutiny and 
contemplation, and if these properties do not appear to the sight at the 
moment of noticing [the object], then when sight perceives a visible object 
and its form, and no subtle features exist in that object, and sight fails to 
perceive any such features in the object’s form, the sentient will still not 
discover the absence of those features from the object, since they appear only 
through contemplation and not merely by glancing [at the object]. If sight, 

I r3 22 therefore, perceives a visible object in which no subtle features exist, | it will 

perceive the object’s true form, but without realizing it to be so. Sight will 
ascertain the object’s true form only after scrutinizing every part of the object 
and ascertaining that no fine detail exists in it. [Only] after such a scrutiny will 
it realize that what it perceived is the object’s true form. 


II. 4 

[4] Thus, in any event, sight will ascertain the form of a visible object only 
by scrutinizing all parts of the object and contemplating every feature that 
may appear in it. This being the case, sight perceives the true forms of visible 
objects only by contemplation. 

[5] Having shown this, we [now] say that sight perceives visible objects in 
two ways: by glancing and by contemplation. For as soon as sight takes notice 

fll32 b of the object, it perceives its manifest features. Then it may | or may not 
subsequently contemplate the object. If it contemplates it and inspects all its 
parts, 1 then it will ascertain its form. If it does not contemplate the object and 
scrutinize all its parts, then it will perceive a non-ascertained form of it. This 
form will either be the true form of the object, though sight will not have 
ascertained it to be so, or it will not be the object’s true form. Often sight 
perceives a visible object, then moves away from it without contemplating it. 
In such a case, sight perceives of the object a non-ascertained form; it perceives 
it by glancing. When, however, sight perceives an object and contemplates it, 
it perceives a verified form of it; and it perceives this form by contemplation. 
That being so, sight’s perception of visible objects occurs in two ways: 
through glancing, and through contemplation. Glancing perception is non- 
ascertained perception, but contemplative perception is the means by which 
the forms of visible objects are ascertained. 

[6] Now that we have shown this, we say that the contemplation by which 

11 133a the true forms | of visible objects are perceived is performed by the eye itself 

and by judgement. For it was shown in [our discussion] On distinguishing the 
Lines of the Ray, 1 that the forms which sight perceives along the axis of the ray 
or along lines close to this axis are clearer and more ascertainable than those it 
perceives along other lines. Thus when the eye faces a visible object which is 
not extremely small, but rather of an appreciable size, and the eye is fixed 
opposite the object and does not move over it while looking at it, then that 
part of the object opposite the eye and lying on the axis or close to it will be 
clearer than the other parts. And sight will sense this because when it perceives 
the whole object, it will find the part opposite the middle of the eye, whose 
form occurs at that middle point, to be clearer than the other parts. 

[7] And it was shown earlier that this state of affairs appears to the sense 
when the visible object is of large dimensions. For when sight perceives the 

u 133b whole of such an object, it finds the form of the part | opposite the middle of 
the eye clearer than all the other parts. And in order clearly to ascertain the 
form of the object, the eye will move in such a way as to face by its middle 
every part of the visible object, thereby perceiving the form of each part in the 
way it perceived the part opposite the eye’s middle at the moment of glancing 
at the object. Thus in order that the sentient may ascertain the form of an 


210 


Optics 


21 1 


object, the eye will move so as to face by its middle every part of the object one 
after the other, so that it may perceive every part of the object as clearly as 
possible. 

[8] Now the faculty of judgement discerns all that it receives of the forms. 
Thus it discerns the colours of parts and their differences if they are different. 
And it discerns the order of parts in relation to one another, their distributions, 
the disposition of each of them, and all features that may become apparent in 
the object through contemplation, and the disposition of the whole object 
which is composed of those parts and features. It is in this manner, therefore, 
that all parts of the visible object, and all its features, are ascertained to be what 
they are. The form of each part will not be ascertained, nor will all features in 

[34a the object be manifest | until after the eye has moved over all parts, and after 
the axis (or [a line] close to it) has passed over each of them. Moreover, it is in 
the nature of sight to engage in this action of contemplation, thus passing the 
ray’s axis over all parts of the object, so that when the faculty of judgement 
decides to contemplate an object, the ray’s axis will move over all parts of it. 
If, therefore, fine detail in an object will only appear through the motion of 
sight and the passing of the ray’s axis (or [a line] close to it) over every part of 
the object, then the sentient will ascertain the form of an object of a sizable 
magnitude only by moving the eye so as to face by its middle every part of the 
object. 

[9] Also, when the object is very small and not directly opposite the eye’s 
middle, contemplation of it will not be complete until the eye has moved so 
that the axis may pass across the object whose form will then occur in the 

34b middle of the eye and become clearly manifest. | Further, the sentient will 
perceive all features of the object only by discerning all the features of all its 
parts. That being so, the contemplation by which the true forms of visible 
objects are perceived is achieved both by the eye itself and by the faculty of 
judgement. Perception of the true forms of visible objects can therefore take 
place only by means of contemplation. And the contemplation by means of 
which the object’s form is ascertained can be effected only by the eye’s 
movement. If the object is of a sizable magnitude, then its contemplation will 
be accomplished only by moving the ray’s axis (or a radial line close to the 
axis) over all diameters of the object. That was the notion of those who 
thought that vision cannot take place without motion and that objects cannot 
be seen at once as a whole; their meaning was that verified vision can only take 
place by means of contemplation through movement of the eye and of the 
ray’s axis 1 over all diameters of the object. 

[10] This is how the sentient ascertains the object’s form by contemplation 
and motion. When sight faces an object whose form then occurs in the eye, the 
sentient will have a general perception of the form as a whole and the clearest 


II- 4 

possible perception of that part of the form at the extremity of the axis; | and, 
at the same time, it will also have some perception of every one of the other 
parts. Then, when the eye moves and the axis passes from one part to another, 
the sentient will have a second perception of the object as a whole and of the 
part at the extremity of the axis, and, moreover, its perception of that part will 
be clearer at the second moment than at the first; it will also gain at the same 
time some perception of the remaining parts. Again, when the axis moves to a 
third part, the sentient will at this third moment have a third perception of the 
whole object and of the part at the extreme end of the axis, and its perception 
of this part will now be clearer than at the first two moments, while also 
having some perception of every one of the remaining parts. Two things 
therefore occur in the sentient as a result of the eye’s movement over the parts 
of the object: one is its repeated perception of the whole object and of each one 
; :55b of its parts, and the second is | that by means of the ray’s axis (or lines near it) it 

perceives every part of the object as clearly as possible; thus all that can be seen 
of these parts will become manifest to the sense [-faculty]. When the sense 
[-faculty] repeatedly perceives the object as a whole and each of its parts, and 
there appears [to it] all that can be seen in the object, it will thereby perceive all 
that is perceptible in that object, and, moreover, will perceive it repeatedly. 

[11] While all this happens and is repeated, the faculty of judgement will 
discern all visible colours, magnitudes, distances, shapes and positions of 
parts, and the identity or lack of identity between all or some of these 
properties and their relative order. Also, by discerning these properties, and 
comparing them with similar, known properties, it will perceive the structure 
of the whole object made up of them and, therefore, as a result of this 
repetition, clarification and discernment, a precise [notion] of all properties in 
the object will be [gained] and the structure of the whole object that is made up 

11 nfa of them will be formed in the imagination. When this happens, | the faculty of 

judgement will ascertain the form which corresponds to the object in the 
sentient. It is in this way, then, that the sentient ascertains the forms of visible 
objects by means of contemplation. 

[12] We say also that when sight perceives an object whose form is then 
ascertained by the sentient, the form of that object will remain in the soul and 
take shape in the imagination. 1 And the form of a repeatedly perceived object 
will be more firmly fixed in the soul than the form of one perceived only once 
or a few times. And when sight perceives an individual, then repeatedly and 
continually perceives other individuals of the same species, the form of that 
species will be confirmed in the soul, and a universal form of that species will 
thus take shape in the imagination. The proof that the forms of visible objects 
remain in the soul and in the imagination is [as follows]: when we remember a 


2X2 


Optics 


213 


person whom we knew or saw or met before and whose form has been 
ascertained, and if we correctly remember that person and the place in which 

136b we met him, | we will immediately imagine the individual features of that 
person, the outline of his face, his gait or posture at that time, and imagine the 
place in which we met him, and may also imagine at the same time other 
visible objects that were present in that place. But to imagine the form of that 
person and the form of the place in which we met him and the state he was in, 
without the presence of the person and the place, is clear evidence that the 
form of that person and place still exists in our soul and remains in our 
imagination. Similarly, when we remember a city which we have previously 
seen and from which we have been absent, we will imagine the form of the 
city and of the places and individuals we have come to know in it, if we 
remember all this in the absence of the city and of what we have seen in it. 
Again, when we remember objects previously seen, and correctly remember 
having seen them, we will imagine their forms as they were then seen. But to 

3?a imagine the forms of objects previously seen, | in the absence of these objects 
at the time of remembering them, is clear proof that the forms perceived by 
sight exist in the soul and are imprinted in the imagination. 

[13] The reason why the form of a repeatedly perceived object is firmer in 
the soul and in the imagination than one whose object was perceived only once 
is [the following.] When something is presented to the soul the form of that 
thing is produced in it. If a long time passes without a second occurrence of 
that thing, the soul may forget it or forget some of its details. If it comes back 
to the soul before the latter forgets it or its details or most of them, the form 
will be renewed in the soul and the soul will then remember the first form by 
means of the second and by virtue of its more recent experience of the thing. 
When the thing is repeatedly presented, the soul will [be able to] remember it 
more easily and will become more accustomed to it, and the thing will be 
more firmly fixed in the soul. 

37b [14] Also, when, for the first time, | the form of a visible object presents 

itself to the soul, the latter may not perceive or ascertain all properties in it, 
and perceive [only] some of them. Then when the form is present a second 
time, the soul will perceive [properties] other than those it perceived at first. 
And as the form is repeatedly presented to the soul, more [properties] will 
appear than at first, assuming that not all properties were at first visible. And 
when the soul perceives and ascertains all that is in a form, including its fine 
detail, a form will be more firmly fixed in the soul and in the imagination 
than one which has not been ascertained or one of which the properties have 
not all been perceived. And when the soul perceives all properties in a form 
at the first time, and in later, repeated perceptions fails to perceive additional 
properties, it will become certain that what it perceived the first time was 


II- 4 

the true form. Now an ascertained and assured form will be more fixed in the 
soul and in the imagination than a non-ascertained form. Thus a repeatedly 
perceived form of a visible object will be ascertained in the soul and in the 
imagination, and as a result of this repetition the soul | will remember this 
form more easily and become more familiar with it, and, owing to this 
ascertainment and remembering, the form will be fixed in the soul and in the 
imagination. For this reason, then, a repeatedly seen form will be more fixed 
in the soul and in the imagination than one which sight has not perceived 
many times. 

[15] There is clear evidence that properties and forms repeatedly presented 
to the soul will be more firmly [fixed in the soul] than others not so presented. 
When someone wants to memorize a scientific, literary or historical work, or 
the like, he will read it many times over. As he does this, the work will be fixed 
in his soul, and as he multiplies the repetition, the work will become more 
firmly fixed and more difficult to forget, whereas if he had read it once or a few 
times it would not have been fixed or, if fixed, quickly forgotten. Also, when 
someone forgets something he once memorized, he will by repeatedly 
studying it again memorize that thing, and its form will be fixed in his soul. 

li [ 38b Thus from consideration | of this state of affairs, it is clearly manifest that as 
forms are repeatedly presented to the soul they become more firmly fixed in it 
than those that are not. 

[16] Now for the universal forms which are produced in the soul for the 
species of visible objects and which take shape in the imagination. To every 
species of visible objects belong an appearance and a shape 1 which are the same 
for all individuals of that species, while the individuals differ in respect of 
particular properties which are also visible. Colour [for example] may be the 
same in all individuals of one species. Now appearance, shape, colour and all 
properties which constitute the appearance of every individual of a certain 
species is a universal form of that species. And sight perceives that appearance 
and shape, and every property which is the same for the species’ individuals, 
from all the individuals of that species which it has perceived; and it also 
perceives the particular properties in which those individuals differ while 
agreeing in the universal properties. And as the sight repeatedly perceives the 
individuals of one species, the universal form in that species will be repeatedly 
presented to it together with the difference between the particular forms of 

N 139a those individuals. | And when the universal form has been repeatedly presen- 
ted to the soul, it will be fixed and established in it. And from the difference 
between the particular forms that accompany the universal forms as they are 
repeatedly presented, the soul will perceive that the form that is identical for 
all individuals of the species is a universal form of that species. In this way, 


214 Optics 

then, the universal forms which sight perceives of the species of visible objects 
are produced in the soul and in the imagination. 

[17] The perceived forms of individual visible objects and the forms of their 
species therefore remain in the soul and are fixed in the imagination, and as 
they are repeatedly perceived by sight they become more firmly fixed in the 
soul and in the imagination; and visible objects are recognized by the sentient 
by means of the forms produced in the soul for the species of these objects and 
their individuals. It is on these forms that the sentient relies in perceiving what 
the visible objects are, because perception of what they are is due only to 
recognition, and recognition results from comparing the form presently 
perceived by sight with the form that has been fixed in the soul by the forms of 

11 139b objects already seen, and from likening the presently perceived form | to one 
of the forms in the imagination. Perception of what the object is, therefore, is 
perception of the similarity between the object’s form and one of the forms 
established in the soul and in the imagination for the species of visible objects. 
And it is on the universal forms produced in the soul for the species of visible 
objects that the sentient relies in perceiving what the visible objects are, 
whereas it is on the individuals’ forms produced in the soul for each of the 
objects previously seen and imagined that it relies in recognizing individual 
objects. The faculty ofjudgement tends by nature to liken the forms of objects 
presently perceived to the form fixed in the imagination and acquired by the 
soul from the forms of visible objects. When, therefore, sight perceives an 
object, the faculty ofjudgement will look for a similar form in the imagina- 
tion. If it finds such a form, it will recognize the object and perceive what it is; 
if not, then it will neither recognize the object nor perceive its quiddity. 

n 140a However, because of the speed | with which the faculty of judgement 
assimilates the form of the object at the moment of vision, it may err by 
likening the object to another, different from it, if the object has a property 
which exists in the other. Then, when it later contemplates the object and 
ascertains its form, it will liken it to the form truly similar to it, thus realizing 
at the second time the error it made in the first assimilation. It is in these ways, 
then, that the sense of sight perceives what the visible objects are. 

[18] Now that all this has become manifest we say that contemplative 
perception of visible objects takes place in two ways: perception by mere 
contemplation and perception by contemplation accompanied by prior 
knowledge. As for perception by mere contemplation, it is the perception of 
unfamiliar objects which sight has not previously discerned. For when sight 
perceives an object which it has not previously seen, or the like of which it has 
not seen, and the beholder wants to ascertain the form of that object, he will 
contemplate it and inspect all its properties, and by means of contemplation 


U. 4 215 

, perceive its true visible form. | If it has not previously seen the object, or 
another of the same species, then it will not recognize its form upon perceiving 
it, and will thus acquire by contemplation the form peculiar to that object, and 
from this form peceive the true nature of the object without, however, 
recognizing it; its ascertainment of the form of such objects will therefore have 
taken place through simple contemplation. Similarly, if sight perceives an 
object which it has seen earlier but does not remember having seen, then upon 
contemplating it without remembering its first form, it will not recognize its 
form at the second occurrence, and therefore sight’s perception of such an 
object will have taken place through simple contemplation. 

[19] But as for perception by contemplation accompanied by prior know- 
ledge, this is perception of all species of visible objects which the sight has 
previously seen, or previously seen objects that belong to those species, and 
the forms of whose species and individuals have been presented to the soul, 
and which are remembered by the soul together with their form when the soul 
resumes contemplating them while recognizing them. When sight perceives 
an object which it has perceived earlier in addition to having perceived objects 
of the same species, then upon noticing that object it will perceive its form as a 

ui whole j by a glance, and then with a little contemplation will perceive its total 
appearance, 1 which is the universal form proper to its species. If it has already 
perceived an object of the same species, and the form of that species has been 
presented to the soul, and it remembers the universal form of that species, then 
it will recognize the universal form it perceives of that object at the moment of 
perception, and upon recognizing it will recognize the object’s species. When, 
further, it contemplates the remaining properties in the object it will recognize 
its particular form. If it has not seen that same object before, or has seen it but 
does not remember having seen it or the form it perceived upon seeing it the 
first time, it will not recognize the particular form. And if not, it will fail to 
recognize the object itself, and will therefore recognize only the object’s 
species; and [only] by contemplating the object and ascertaining its form will 
it gain possession of the object’s particular form that corresponds to its 
individual character. But if it has seen that object earlier, in addition to having 
seen individuals of the same species, and if it remembers having seen it 
together with the form | it has already perceived of that object, then it will 
recognize the particular form upon perceiving it, and at the same moment 
recognize the object; thus it will ascertain the object’s form by perceiving its 
particular form, and, moreover, will recognize the object itself both as a 
member of a species and as an individual. If it has seen that object before, but 
has not seen any other individuals of the same species, and therefore has not 
discerned the universal form of that species, then, when it perceives the object 
together with its universal properties which are common to its species, it will 


15 


216 


Optics 


217 


fail to recognize the object or perceive its quiddity from perceiving its 
universal form. If it perceives the remaining properties in that object, thus 
perceiving the particular form it has perceived [earlier] of that object, then it 
will recognize the particular form upon perceiving it; and when it does, it will 
recognize the object itself as a particular individual. No visible object is 

142a perceived by contemplation | in any other way. Perception of visible objects 
by contemplation therefore takes place in two ways: perception by mere 
contemplation or perception by contemplation accompanied by prior know- 
ledge; and recognition may be of the species alone, or of both the species and 
the individual. 

[20] Moreover, perception by contemplation can take place only in time, 
for contemplation is achieved only by discernment and the motion of the eye, 
and these can take place only in time; therefore, contemplation can take place 
only in time. It has also been shown in the foregoing that perception by 
recognition and perception by discernment can take place only in time; and it 
has just been shown that contemplative perception of visible objects is 
accomplished by means either of simple contemplation or contemplation 
along with prior knowledge, and that what is perceived by contemplation or 
recognition can only be perceived in time. We say, therefore, that in most 
cases perception by contemplation accompanied by prior knowledge occupies 
a shorter time than that achieved by simple contemplation. For things which 
exist in the soul and are memorized have no need, to be recognized, of an 
inspection of all properties that constitute their nature; rather, to perceive 
them it is sufficient to perceive one of the properties peculiar to them. So that 

142b when the faculty | of judgement perceives one of the peculiar properties of the 
form presented to it, while remembering the first form, it will recognize the 
total form by means of that property; for every peculiar property of the form 
is a sign that indicates that form. 

[21] For example, when, upon seeing an individual man, sight perceives 
only the outline of his hand, it will perceive him to be a man before seeing that 
outline of his face or of the rest of his parts. The case is similar when sight 
perceives the outline of a man’s leg or face without perceiving the other parts. 
Thus by perceiving some of the properties peculiar to the figure of man, sight 
will perceive the visible object to be a man without needing to perceive the 
other parts, because it will perceive them by prior knowledge from the forms 
produced in the soul for the figure of man. It is similarly the case with a given 
individual previously seen: when sight perceives some of the properties 
peculiar to the individual’s particular form, such as snubness of the nose 
(assuming the individual to be a man), or a blueness in the eyes, or the joining 
of his eyebrows or the wrinkles in his forehead, it will, by perceiving these 


II. 4 

distinctive features together with his total form, perceive him to be that 
person and recognize him. Similarly, sight may recognize a horse through 
some blemish, | such as a hairless spot, or through a white spot on its forehead. 
And likewise with writing: when someone skilled in it sees the form of abjad , 1 
he will perceive it to be abjad from its total form before inspecting the letters in 
this word one by one. And so it is with all words repeatedly presented to 
scribes: they are recognized by them at the moment of their being perceived 
before every one of their letters has been inspected. 

[22] Objects which sight has previously perceived, and whose forms it 
recognizes and remembers, may be perceived by means of signs, but not so 
unfamiliar objects not previously seen or those which were once seen but are 
now forgotten. For when sight perceives an object which it has not seen 
earlier, and perceives the outline of one of its parts, it will not thereby perceive 
what the object is, because it does not possess an established form for the 
remainder of the object’s parts. Sight will not therefore perceive the quiddity 
11 143b of an object it has not seen earlier unless it inspects all its parts and properties. | 
And it is similarly the case with an object which sight has previously seen but 
does not remember having seen: sight does not ascertain its form until after it 
has contemplated all its properties. Now to perceive some of the form’s 
properties will take a shorter time than that in which all properties in it are 
perceived. Further, vision by means of contemplation with prior knowledge 
will in most cases take a shorter time than vision by simple contemplation, and 
for this reason sight perceives familiar objects extremely quickly and in an 
insensible time, there being in most cases no appreciable time between 
confronting the object and sight’s perception of its quiddity. For a man will 
have perceived visible objects from his childhood and the beginning of his 
development, and individual objects and the universal forms of their species 
will have been repeatedly presented to him. And it has been shown that the 
forms of seen objects occur in the soul and take shape in the imagination, and 
11 144a that repeatedly seen forms | are fixed in the soul and their shape established in 
the imagination. Thus the forms of all familiar objects and species, and of all 
common properties, have been established in the soul and shaped in the 
imagination and are present to the memory. When, therefore, sight perceives 
a familiar object, first perceiving its form as a whole, then a distinctive feature 
of that object, it will perceive the quiddity of the object upon perceiving that 
significant feature; its perception of the object will be achieved by means of 
prior knowledge and a little contemplation, and not by resuming the con- 
templation of all properties in the object at the moment of perceiving the 
object and recognizing it. And since sight perceives familiar objects and 
recognizes their quiddity by means of signs and prior knowledge, its percep- 
tion of their quiddity will in most cases take place in an insensible time because 


Optics 

it is achieved by brief contemplation and as a result of perceiving [only] some 
of their properties by contemplation- 

123] Again, sight’s perception of the object as a species will take place in a 
shorter time than that in which it perceives it as an individual. For when sight 
ii 144b perceives | an individual man, it will perceive a man before perceiving the 
particular form which belongs to him as an individual. It may perceive him to 
be a man without perceiving the outline of his face, but may so perceive him 
from his upright frame or the arrangement of his members without discerning 
his face. It is similarly the case with the species of familiar visible objects: sight 
perceives the species to which the individual object belongs by the signs that 
characterize that species. But not so the perception of the object’s individual- 
ity, for sight perceives this only by perceiving the particular properties 
belonging to the individual object or by perceiving some of them. Now 
perception of the particular properties that belong to an individual object can 
be achieved only after having perceived the universal properties in that 
individual or some of them. But, in general, the properties in the universal 
form corresponding to the species of an individual are some of the properties 
contained in its particular form. And since the perception of some [properties] 
will take place in a shorter time than that in which all of them are perceived, 
sight will perceive the object’s species in a shorter time than that in which it 
will perceive the object’s individuality. 

11 145a [24] Again, | the times required for perceiving the species of familiar objects 

will vary; for some species of such objects might be confused with one 
another, whereas others might not be so confused. Take, for example, the 
species of man and of horse: the form of man’s species cannot be confused with 
the form of other animal species; but this is not so with a horse, for a horse 
resembles many other beasts in general appearance. Now the time in which 
sight perceives enough of man’s individuality and specific nature to be able to 
perceive him as a man is not the same as that in which it perceives enough of a 
horse’s individuality and specific nature to be able to perceive it as a horse, 
especially if each of these is seen from a sizable distance. For when sight 
perceives an individual man in motion, it will immediately perceive him to be 
a man from his erect frame together with his movement; it will perceive him 
to be an animal from his movement, and from his erect frame will perceive 
him to be a man. Not so, however, when it perceives an individual horse; for 
when sight perceives an individual horse in motion, and, in addition, per- 
ceives its figure and the number of its legs, it will not by virtue of all this 
n 145b perceive it to be a horse, because these properties exist in many | quadrupeds, 
which are identical with the horse in respect of these and other properties, 
especially the mule, which resembles the horse in many respects. Rather, a 
horse is distinguished from the mule by properties which are not very 


II. 4 2I 9 

obvious, such as the outline of the face, the elongation of the neck, the 
quickness of movement and the length of its stride. If, therefore, sight does 
not perceive one of these properties that distinguish the horse, in addition to 
perceiving the horse’s general appearance, it will not perceive it to be a horse. 
Now the time in which sight perceives the uprightness of a man’s stature is not 
the same as that in which it perceives the figure of a horse together with the 
particular properties that distinguish the horse from other [animals]. And the 
time in which sight perceives the species man is shorter than that in which it 
perceives the species horse; both times are short, but one of them always 
exceeds the other. 

[25] Similarly, when sight perceives roses in bloom in some garden it will 
immediately perceive that these visible objects are roses on account of the 
particular colour of roses in addition to their being in a garden, before 
perceiving the round shape of their petals or their arrangement, | and before 
perceiving all the properties that constitute the form of roses. And if the roses 
resemble some other flowers, sight will perceive them in any case to be 
flowers and not leaves of trees or [other] plants. But this is not the case when 
sight perceives the greenness of sweet basil in a garden, for by merely 
perceiving its green colour in addition to its being in the garden, sight will not 
perceive.it to be sweet basil, because the majority of plants are green, and, 
moreover, many plants resemble basil in green colour and shape, such as 
mint 1 and similar plants. Thus if sight does not perceive the shape of the basil’s 
leaves, their dense arrangement and the characteristic property of basil, it will 
not perceive it to be basil. But the time in which sight perceives in the basil the 
shape of its leaves and its characteristic property, in addition to perceiving its 
green colour, is not the same as that in which it perceives of the roses their 
being roses alone. And so it is with all similar species: sight cannot perceive 
what they are without further contemplation, and if the seen objects resemble 
each other only a little, sight will perceive their quiddity by means of brief 

ur>b contemplation. The same is true of individual objects: for | if sight recognizes 
the object but does not assimilate it to other individual objects known to it, it 
will perceive it by means of brief contemplation or by means of signs; but 
sight will require further contemplation to perceive an individual object 
which it recognizes and which it assimilates to other individual objects known 
to it. 

[26] Sight therefore perceives the specific nature and the individuality of all 
familiar visible objects by means of brief contemplation in addition to prior 
knowledge; and perception of such objects will in most cases take place in an 
insensible time; and the time required for their perception will vary according 
to the difference between their species or between their individuals; and 
perception of the specific nature of an individual will be quicker than 


L 


220 


Optics 


perception of its individuality; and perception of species that resemble each 
other less will be quicker than perception of species that resemble each other 
more; and perception of an individual that resembles [other individuals] less 
will be quicker than perception of an individual that resembles [other individ- 
uals] more. 

[27] Again, the time of contemplation will vary with the properties which 
are being contemplated in the visible objects. For example, if sight perceives a 

1 147a many-legged creature whose legs are small and which is moving, it | will upon 
perceiving and contemplating it perceive its movement by brief con- 
templation; then by perceiving its movement will perceive it to be an animal; 
then after contemplating its legs will perceive it to be many-legged on account 
of the separateness of the legs, but will not immediately realize their number, 
and in order to know that it will require more contemplation and more time. 
Thus the sight’s perception of the [object’s] animality will take place in a short 
time, then its perception of the [animal’s] many legs will also take place in a 
short time, but sight will perceive their number only after it fixes on the legs 
one by one and counts them, and this can only take place in a sizable interval of 

I time, the amount of this time, too, being in accordance with how many the 

legs are. Similarly, when sight perceives a circular figure in which is inscribed 
a polygonal figure the sides of which are small and also of inexcessively 
different magnitudes, it will immediately upon perceiving the general figure 

1 147b perceive it to be circular, but will not at once perceive | the inscribed polygon 
if its sides are extremely small. But when it further contemplates the circular 
figure, the polygon inscribed in it will become visible. Thus its perception of 
the circularity of the circular figure will be quicker than its perception of the 
polygon inside it. But when the polygonal figure is perceived the inequality of 
its sides will not be immediately apparent and sight will not be able to judge 
their equality or inequality; the inequality of the polygon’s sides will only 
become apparent (if they are small and the difference between them is small) 
after further contemplation and after [the passage of] a sizable interval of time. 

[28] Again, when the perceiver 1 wants to contemplate the shape of an object 
as a whole it will be enough for him to let the eye pass over the object’s 
periphery only. Similarly, when he wants to contemplate the object’s colour, 
he will find it sufficient merely to let his sight pass over the object. And, again, 
when he wants to contemplate the roughness or smoothness of the object’s 
surface, or its transparency or opacity, it will be sufficient for him merely to let 
his sight pass quickly over the surface. But the situation is different with 

1 148a inapparent features and fine detail | that may exist in visible objects, such as the 
shapes of all their parts and their similarity, the magnitudes of parts and their 
difference, the similarity and difference of their colours, and the arrangement 
of small parts relative to one another if small and distinct parts exist in the 


221 


II- 4 

object. For these properties are perceived by contemplation only after sight 
has fixed on every one of the parts, and has moved round every one of them 
and compared them with each other. This, however, cannot be precisely 
accomplished in a short time or by quick movement, but requires a measur- 
able interval of time. And the same is true of all subtle features. Therefore the 
time required for sight’s contemplation of visible properties varies according 
to the properties being contemplated. 

[29] Now that all this has been made clear we say that vision through prior 
knowledge, if accomplished by means of signs and brief contemplation 
without resuming contemplation of all properties in the object, is not verified 
perception. For perception through prior knowledge and signs grasps only 
what the object is as a whole; the faculty of judgement then perceives the 
ii 148b particular properties in the object | in accordance with what it has recognized 
of the object from the first form produced in the soul by that object. Now 
particular properties in a visible object may change with the passage of time; 
moreover, sight cannot perceive changed properties in an object by means of 
prior knowledge. And if the change is imperceptible or not completely 
manifest sight will not perceive it at a glance, nor will it perceive change by 
means of contemplation unless the change is extremely manifest. For 
example, if sight recognizes a certain person for whom it possesses a sound 
and verified form; if, further, during an absence of that person for a period of 
time certain freckles or marks or spots develop in his face which are impercep- 
tible or not completely manifest; then, when sight later perceives the person 
and at once recognizes him, it will not at the same time perceive the freckles or 
marks on his face if they are not completely manifest, but will recognize the 
11 149a form apart from the | marks; therefore, when it sees the person and recognizes 
him without resuming its contemplation of him, it will believe him to be of 
unimpaired form on account of what it already knows from his [previous] 
form. If it does not resume contemplating him its perception of that object 
will not be in accordance with what it is; only after further contemplation will 
the marks in the person’s face become visible and its form be perceived in 
accordance with what it is. 

[30] Similarly, if sight perceives a fruit which it contemplates and recog- 
nizes; if, further, during an absence of some days, the fruit has grown, thus 
increasing in magnitude and changing in shape, or a red part of it increases in 
size or becomes redder, provided the increase or change in the fruit is not too 
great but only slight; then, when sight looks again at this fruit and recognizes 
it, it will not at once perceive the slight change it has undergone. If, however, 
it resumes contemplating it at a subsequent moment, while remembering the 
true form it first [acquired], it will perceive the change which has occurred and 


2.22 Optics 

ii 149b will ascertain the form of the fruit in the second instance. | If, however, sight 
does not resume contemplation of the fruit, it will not perceive of it by prior 
knowledge the true form which the fruit will have at the moment of being 
perceived the second time. 

[31] Again, if sight perceives somewhere a smooth wall [covered] with 
designs and decorations 1 and, contemplating the wall, it ascertains its form; if, 
further, during an absence [of the beholder] from that place for a period of 
time the wall undergoes some change, such as roughening of its surface or a 
disturbance in some of its designs which is not completely manifest; then upon 
returning to that place and looking at that wall while remembering its first 
form and remembering having seen it, sight will not at the moment of seeing 
and recognizing it perceive the inapparent disturbance which has occurred in 
it, and will recognize its form as one free from that disturbance. Thus if the 
surface has become rough sight will take it to be as smooth as it was when it 
was formerly acquainted with it; and if the designs have become indistinct, 
sight will take them to be as distinct as they were at first. Therefore, at the 
moment of perceiving and recognizing that wall sight will perceive its 

1 150a form by recognition; | and, if it does not resume contemplation of the wall, it 
will perceive its form differently from what this form is, so that the changed 
features of that wall will become visible and its form be perceived in 
accordance with what it is only if sight resumes contemplation of it. 

[32] Now all visible objects in the world of generation and decay are subject 
to change in their colour, shape, magnitude, figure, smoothness, roughness, 
the arrangement of their parts and in many of their [other] particular proper- 
ties, because their nature is changeable and also because they are disposed to be 
affected by what supervenes upon them from outside. Change is therefore 
natural to them, and the change that can be perceived by sight is possible for all 
of them; and although invisible change owing to alteration may take place in 
some of them, no invisible change can supervene upon any of them from 
outside. All visible objects in the world of generation and decay are subject to 
change, which is perceptible to sight. And if all visible objects are susceptible 

[ 150b to change and may undergo change which is apparent to sight, | then sight 
perceives no visible object which it has previously perceived, and whose form 
it has ascertained and now remembers, with the confidence at this second 
perception that the object possesses the form it had at first and that no change 
has occurred in it, since change is possible for all visible objects. When sight 
therefore perceives a visible object which it has previously perceived and 
contemplated, and whose form it had ascertained and now remembers, it will 
recognize the object at the moment of seeing it. If the object has undergone 
some manifest change, sight will perceive that change at the moment of seeing 
it. If the change which has occurred is not manifest, sight will recognize the 


U. 4 223 

object and take it to be as it knew it; if, however, it does not resume 
contemplation of the object it will not be certain that the form it recognizes has 
remained as it was without undergoing any change; for it is possible that some 
inapparent change has occurred which will become visible only through 
contemplation. If, then, | it contemplates the object, its form will be ascer- 
tained, but if not, sight will not, through perceiving the object and recog- 
nizing it, be certain of the object’s form. The perception of visible objects 
which sight achieves through prior knowledge or signs or brief contemplation 
is not, therefore, ascertained perception, nor does sight achieve ascertained 
perception of an object unless it contemplates the object at the time of 
perceiving it and unless it scrutinizes and discerns all properties in the object at 
the time of perceiving it. 

[ 33 ] Vision, therefore, takes place in two ways: by glancing and by 
contemplation. In vision by glancing sight perceives manifest properties alone 
without thereby ascertaining the form of the seen object. Glancing vision may 
consist in glancing alone or in glancing accompanied by prior knowledge. 
Vision by mere glancing is vision of objects which sight neither recognizes 

;b nor contemplates at the moment of noticing them. Vision by glancing | 
together with prior knowledge is vision of objects which sight has previously 
recognized, if sight recognizes them at the moment of noticing them without 
resuming their contemplation. In either case, sight does not by glancing 
perceive what the object really is, whether or not it previously recognized the 
object. 

[ 34 ] Vision by contemplation is of two kinds: vision by simple con- 
templation, and vision by contemplation together with prior knowledge. 
Vision by mere contemplation is vision of objects which sight has not 
previously perceived, or does not remember having perceived, if it contem- 
plates them at the time of perception. Vision by contemplation with prior 
knowledge is vision of all objects which sight has previously perceived and 
now remembers having seen, if in addition to recognizing them it resumes 
their contemplation and surveys their properties. This vision divides into two: 
one is the familiar vision of familiar objects, and this is achieved by means of 
the distinctive features which are perceived by brief contemplation, and 

i: >-a through surveying some of the properties | of the object in the presence of 
prior knowledge. In most cases this vision takes place in an insensible interval 
of time; and nothing perceived in this manner is fully ascertained. The second 
is that which is achieved by complete contemplation and by surveying all 
properties of the object at the moment of perceiving it in the presence of prior 
knowledge of that object. In most cases it takes place in a sensible interval of 
time, and this time varies according to the properties in the object. Vision of 


224 


Optics 


this description is that through which familiar objects are perceived with full 
certainty. 

[35] In general, sight cannot achieve fully verified perception of a visible 
object unless it contemplates all properties of the object and scrutinizes all its 
parts and discerns all properties of the object at the time of perceiving it, 
whether or not it had prior knowledge of the object. This verification, 
however, is relative to the sense [-faculty], the [words] ‘ verified/ ascertained' 
and ‘fully verified/ascertained’ referring here | to the limit of what the sense 
[-faculty] can perceive. Moreover, sight’s perception of visible objects will 
depend on the power of sight, for sights differ in regard to the strength and 
weakness of their sensitivity. 

[36] It is in these ways, then, that sight perceives visible objects, and these 
are all the modes of vision; and that is what we intended to make clear in this 
chapter. We have now completed our detailed account of all objects of vision 
and all visible properties; we have shown all things by means of which sight 
achieves perception of visible objects and visible properties, and distinguished 
all parts into which all modes of vision are divided. And these are the matters 
which we aimed to make clear in this Book. 


BOOK III 

ON ERRORS OF DIRECT VISION 
AND THEIR CAUSES 


[37] The end of Book II of the Optics 
of al-Hasan ibn al-Hasan. 

The copying ended in the night of Sunday the twenty-eighth 
ofjumada the Second, the year six and seventy 
and four hundred, at Basra. 

[Thus] wrote Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn JaTar, offering praise 
to God, and prayer for the best of His creations, 
Muhammad the prophet, and for his family and companions. 


III. I 


In the Name of God the Compassionate and Merciful 


227 


THE THIRD BOOK 
OF THE OPTICS 

OF ABU c ALl AL-HASAN IBN AL-HASAN IBN AL-HAYTHAM 


THE CHAPTERS OF THIS BOOK 
WHICH ARE SEVEN 


Chapter 1: 
Chapter 2: 

Chapter 3: 
Chapter 4: 
Chapter 5: 
Chapter 6: 
Chapter 7: 


Preface 

On what needs to be advanced for clarifying the discussion on 
errors of sight 

On the causes of errors of sight 
On distinguishing errors of sight 
On the ways in which sight errs in pure sensation 
On the ways in which sight errs in recognition 
On the ways in which sight errs in inference 


CHAPTER 1 
PREFACE 

[1] It was shown in the First and Second Books how sight directly perceives 
visible objects as they are, | and how it ascertains the form of an object, and 
how it perceives and ascertains each of the particular [visible] properties as it 
is. But not every object is perceived as it is by sight, nor is the beholder right in 
imagining that every property perceived by sight has been perceived as it 
really is. Rather, sight may err in much of what it perceives of visible objects, 
thus perceiving them to be other than they are, sometimes sensing its error at 
the time of ernng, but sometimes not, believing itself to be right when in fact 
it is in error. For when sight perceives an exceedingly distant object, it 
perceives its magnitude as smaller than the real magnitude; and if the object is 
very near, sight will perceive its magnitude as greater than its real magnitude; 
and if it perceives a square or a many-sided figure from an exceedingly great 
distance, it will perceive it as round if the figure is of equal diameters, and as 


228 


Optics 


[1 2b oblong | if the diameters are unequal; and it will perceive a sphere from an 
exceedingly great distance as a plane. Such states of affairs are many and of 
many kinds, sight being in error in all that it perceives in this way. 

[2] Again, when looking at a star, sight will perceive it as momentarily 
stationary, though the star moves. Upon reviewing his knowledge the 
beholder will know that the star moves while being viewed, and upon 
discerning this state of affairs the beholder will at once sense that he has erred 
in perceiving the star as stationary. And if the beholder looks at an object on 
the surface of the ground from an exceedingly great distance, while the object 
is moving very slowly, but does not view the object at length, he will perceive 
it as stationary. If the beholder has no prior knowledge of the object's motion, 
and he does not stay long before the object, he will not immediately recognize 
that he errs in perceiving that object as stationary; thus the beholder errs in his 

1 3a perception of such things | without sensing his error. Sight may therefore err 

in much of what it perceives of visible objects, sometimes sensing its error and 
sometimes not. 

[3] Since it was shown in the two preceding Books how sight perceives 

| visible objects as they are, and it has been shown by what we have stated in this 

Chapter that sight may err in much of what it perceives of visible objects, it 
now remains for us to show why and when and how error occurs in sight. We 
shall confine this Book to discussion of the errors of sight in what it perceives 
directly; we shall show the reasons on account of which errors are made by 
sight, and of how many kinds these errors are, and show how error occurs in 
each of their kinds, and propose what needs to be advanced for the clarification 
of the discussion on errors. 


CHAPTER 2 

ON WHAT NEEDS TO BE ADVANCED FOR CLARIFYING 
THE DISCUSSION ON ERRORS OF SIGHT 

13b I [1] It was shown in the First Book that sight perceives no visible object 

except through the lines of the ray, and that it perceives the order of visible 
! objects and of their parts by the arrangement of the radial lines. It was also 

shown that a single object perceived simultaneously by the two eyes is 
perceived as one if it is similarly situated in relation to both eyes, but when the 
single object is differently situated with respect to the eyes the beholder 
perceives it double, and that familiar objects which are always perceived 
simultaneously by both eyes are each perceived as one. That being so, we 
must determine how a single object is simultaneously perceived by both eyes 
as one at most times and in most cases, and how it comes about that a single 


III. 2 


229 


object is similarly situated in relation to both eyes at most times and in most 
cases, and also show how it comes about that the position of a single object 
may differ with respect to the two eyes, and when this happens. Having stated 
this matter in the First Book and demonstrated it in a general discourse, we 
will now explain it in detail and sum it up, and also show how these matters 
can be experimentally examined in such a way as to achieve certainty. 

!IU«i [2] We say, then, that when a beholder | looks at a visible object, each of his 

eyes will regard that object; when he gazes at the object, both of his eyes will 
equally and similarly gaze at it; when he contemplates the object, both of his 
eyes will equally contemplate it; and when sight moves over the object in 
order to contemplate it, both eyes will move over it and contemplate it. 

[3] When the beholder fixes his sight on an object, the axes of both eyes will 
converge on the object, meeting at a point on its surface. When he contem- 
plates the object, the two axes will together move over the surface of the 
object and together pass over all of its parts. And, in general, the two eyes are 
identical in all their conditions, and the sensitive power is the same in both of 
them, and their actions and affections are severally always identical. When one 
eye moves for the purpose of vision, the other moves for the same purpose 

ill 4 b and with the same motion; and when one of them comes to rest, | the other 
(likewise] is at rest. Thus it is not possible that one eye should move for the 
purpose of seeing while the other remains motionless, nor that one eye should 
strain to look at an object without the other straining to look at the same 
object, unless some obstacle or cover or some other accident intervened, thus 
hindering one of the eyes from participating in the act performed by the other. 
When both eyes are observed as they perceive visible objects, and their actions 
and movements are examined, their respective actions and movements will be 
found to be always identical. 

[4] Now it was shown in the foregoing that between every visible object 
and the centre of the eye there exists at the moment of vision an imaginary 
cone whose vertex is the centre of the eye and whose base is the surface of the 
perceived object. But this cone comprises all the lines by means of which sight 
perceives that object; and, therefore, if the two axes of the eyes meet at a point 
on the surface of the object facing the eyes, then that surface will be the 

M 5a common base of the radial cones formed | between the centres of the eyes and 
the object; the point in which both axes meet will have the same position with 
respect to both eyes because it will be opposite the middles of both eyes, and 
the axes between it and the two eyes will be perpendicular to the surfaces of 
those eyes at their middles. As for the remainder of the object’s surface, there 
will exist between every point in it and the centres of both eyes two lines 
similarly situated in direction 1 with respect to the two axes: I mean that any 
pair of lines imagined between the centres of the eyes and [any] point on the 



230 


Optics 


231 


object’s surface on which the axes of both eyes meet will be displaced from the 
axes to one and the same side, while the meeting point will lie on each of the 
two axes. As for the distances of these lines from the axes, every pair of lines 
drawn from the centres of both eyes to any point that is very close to the 
meeting point will be sensed as equidistant from the axes. For the axes drawn 
II 5 b to | the meeting point are equal and have no sensible difference if the object is 
not very close to the eye but at a moderate distance from it. And the same will 
hold for all points that are very close to the meeting point: no two lines drawn 
from the centres of the eyes to any one of these points will be perceived to 
differ greatly in length, and such lines may even be [perceived as] equal. If, 
however, the two displaced lines are in the plane of the two axes, then they 
will be unequal. For the line drawn from the point where the axes meet to a 
point beside it contains with the axes two unequal angles; but the axes are 
equal; and the line joining the two points is common; therefore the two 
displaced lines are unequal. But this inequality will have no effect on the sense 
if the displaced point is close to the meeting point. If the displaced lines lie 
below or above the axes, then they may be equal, 2 for the angles contained by 
11 (u the axes and the line joining the two points may be | equal when the point lies 

below or above the axes. In the positions between these two the difference 
between the two lines that are displaced from the axes will be less than that 
between the first two displaced lines, and, therefore, the discrepancy between 
their lengths will have no sensible effect. 

[5] Thus the difference between two lines drawn from the eyes’ centres to a 
point near that where the axes meet will not be such as to have a sensible effect; 
but the axes are equal; and the line joining the meeting point with the displaced 
point to which the lines are drawn from the centres is common to the two 
triangles produced by these lines; therefore the two angles produced at the 
eyes’ centres and subtended at the object’s surface by the common line will be 
equal or have no sensible difference. These two angles will invariably be very 
small if the point is very close to that where the axes meet. 

[6] Now, if the two lines drawn to every point close to the meeting point 

in 6 b contain with the axes two equal angles, | then the distance from the visual axes 

of every pair of lines drawn to one and the same point among those close to the 
meeting point will be the same. 

[7] That being so, every point in the object’s surface on which the visual 
axes meet, provided it is close to the meeting point, will be similarly situated 
in both eyes in respect to distance from the axes. As for points which are far 
from the meeting point, and which are displaced to the same side of both axes, 
the two angles produced by the two lines drawn to one of them and the two 
axes may differ appreciably. Any such point among those that are far from the 
meeting point will be similarly situated in both eyes in respect to direction 


III. 2 

only, but not in respect to distance from the axes. Therefore, in the case of a 
bmocularly perceived object, if it is moderately large and of approximately 
equal and not large dimensions, the position of every point in it relative to the 
eyes will be the same in respect to both direction and distance; | and its form 
will occur in the eyes in two similarly situated places with respect to the eyes. 
If the binocularly perceived object is of wide dimensions, the point on it in 
which the axes meet will be similarly situated relative to both eyes; and all 
points close to that point on the surface of that object will also be similarly 
situated relative to the eyes in respect to both direction and distance; and all 
points on that object’s surface that are far from the meeting point and 
displaced from both axes on the same side will be similarly situated relative to 
the eyes in respect to direction and sometimes also in respect to distance but 
sometimes not. Thus the form of the part at the meeting point (i.e. where the 
axes meet) in such an object, and of parts surrounding that point or close to it, 
will in all cases occur in two similarly situated places in the eyes; the form of 
the remaining parts 1 that are far from the meeting point and that surround the 
similarly situated part will be continuous with the form of the similarly 
situated part; | and thus the whole of the two forms will occur in two places in 
the eyes that do not greatly differ in position; rather, the difference, if such 
exists, will only be between their edges and will be slight because of the 
continuity of the edges with the similarly situated middles, provided that the 
eyes remain fixed before the object and the axes are fixed on one point in it. 
When the eyes move over the object and the axes pass from that point, moving 
together over the object’s dimensions, then the position relative to the eyes of 
every point on the object and the position of every neighbouring point at 
which the axes meet will be extremely similar; and, as the axes move over the 
object, the form of every part of the object will occupy two similarly situated 
places in the eyes; and, while motion and contemplation take place, the 
formfs] of all parts of the object will have a similar condition in both eyes. 

[8] Similarly also, when sight perceives separate objects at the same time, 
while the axes meet and are fixed on one of them, and the object on which the 
axes meet | is of approximately equal dimensions, the form of that object will 
occur in two similarly situated places in the eyes. And the form of every object 
close to that object, provided the object is small and not of large dimensions, 
will occur in two places in the eyes that do not sensibly differ in position. If an 
object distant from that on which the axes fall is present, and both eyes 
perceive it, then, as long as the axes remain fixed on that [first] object, the form 
of the distant object will occur in two similarly situated places in the eyes in 
respect to direction only but not in respect to distance. And since not all of the 
[distant object’s] parts are similarly situated 1 in respect to distance from the 
axes, the form of such an object will be confused and indistinct. Then when 


16 


232 


Optics 


III. 2 


233 


the eyes move and the axes move and meet on each of the objects which were 
perceived simultaneously, the form of each of them will occur in two similarly 
situated places in the eyes in respect to both direction and distance, whereupon 
the form of each | of these objects will be ascertained. 

[9] The axes of the eyes may meet on an object while the eyes perceive 
another object differently situated in direction with respect to the eyes. This 
happens when the other object lies closer to the eyes than that on which the 
axes meet while being situated between the axes, or when it is farther off from 
the object on which the axes meet while also being situated between the axes if 
imagined to be extended beyond their meeting point, provided that the object 
on which the axes meet does not obscure the farther object or obscures [only] 
part of it. 

[10] It is in these ways, then, that binocular perception of visible objects 
occurs. 

[11] It was also shown in the Second Book that the axis of the ray is one and 
the same unvarying line, that it passes through the centres of all layers of the 
eye, that it extends rectilinearly to the middle of the bend in the cavity of the 
nerve on which the eye is set and which is situated at the aperture in the 
concavity of the bone, that it remains attached to all centres | and inseparable 
from them, that its position relative to all parts of the eye always remains 
identical and unchanged whether the eye moves or is at rest, and that the two 
axes are similarly situated in relation to the eyes. It was also shown that the 
position of any two similarly situated parts of the eyes will be the same in the 
hollow of the common nerve from which the last sentient perceives the forms 
of visible objects. Let us imagine a straight line that joins the centres of the two 
apertures in the concavities of the bones surrounding the eyes, and imagine 
two lines drawn from the centres of the apertures along the middles of the 
cavities of the nerves — they will meet in the middle of the cavity of the 
common nerve and their position with respect to the line that joins the centres 
of the apertures will be the same; for the positions of the nerves relative to the 
apertures are the same, and therefore the angles made by these two lines and 
the line joining the centres of the apertures are equal. 

[12] Let us imagine the line that joins the centres of the apertures | to be 
bisected, and imagine a line drawn to the bisecting point from the middle 
point in the cavity of the common nerve at which the lines extending through 
the nerves’ cavities meet — this line will be perpendicular to the line that joins 
the centres of the apertures. Imagine this line to extend in the outward 
direction facing the eyes — it will be fixed in one unvarying position because 
the point at the middle of the cavity of the common nerve, in which the lines 
extending through the middles of the cavities of the nerves meet, is one and 


unchanging. But the point that bisects the line joining the centres of the 
apertures is one and unchanging. Therefore, the position of the straight line 
that passes through these two points is one and unchanging. Let us call this line 
‘the common axis’. 

[13] Let us now imagine a visible object at a point in this line on the side 
in 10a opposite the eyes, and imagine both eyes | looking at that object; imagine, 

further, that the axes of the eyes meet in the point on the surface of the object at 
which the common axis meets that surface, for this is possible with regard to 
any object similarly situated with reference to the eyes. And if the axes meet in 
a point on the common axis, then the axes together with the common axis and 
the line joining the centres of the apertures and the lines extending through the 
hollows of the nerves will all be in the same plane. For the axes pass through 
the centres of the apertures, since they pass through the middles of the cavities 
of the two nerves at the place where they narrow. Therefore, if the axes meet 
on the common axis they will be in the plane of the common axis and of the 
line intersecting it that joins the apertures’ centres. Further, the axes from the 
centres of the apertures to the meeting point on the common axis will be equal 
in 10b and | similarly situated with respect to the common axis. Also, the segments 
of the axes from the centres of the eyes to the meeting point will be equal, since 
the centres of the eyes are equally distant from the centres of the apertures in 
the bones. And the segments of the axes from the surfaces of the eyes to the 
meeting point will also be equal, because the radii of the ocular spheres are 
equal. All this being so, the point on the object’s surface at which the axes meet 
will be similarly situated in relation to the two points on the surfaces of the 
eyes through which the two axes pass, and it will be equidistant from them. 
Those two points on the eyes’ surfaces are the points in which there will occur 
the two forms of the point at which the two axes meet. 

[14] Again, the two points in the eyes’ surfaces that lie on the axes are 
similarly situated with respect to the cavity of the common nerve, and the 
same points are similarly situated with reference to every point on the 

in 1 1 a common nerve; | therefore, the two points in the surfaces of the eyes that lie on 

the two axes will be perfectly similarly and equally situated relative to the 
point on the common axis at the middle of the common nerve where the lines 
drawn from the centres of the apertures meet. Thus when the two forms that 
occur in the two points where the surfaces of the eyes intersect the axes reach 
the common nerve, they will both occur in the point on the common axis that 
lies in the middle of the cavity of the common nerve where the lines meet, thus 
becoming a single form. 

[15] When the forms at the points where the surfaces of the eyes intersect the 
two axes occur in the point on the common axis at the middle of the common 
nerve, then the forms at the points surrounding each of the two points on the 


234 


Optics 


III. 2 


235 


axes in the eyes" surfaces will occur inside the common nerve at the points that 
in nb surround | the point on the common axis. But for any two points on the 
surfaces of the eyes, if they are similarly situated from the two middle points 
on the axes in respect of direction and distance, then their position will be the 
same in relation to one and the same point in the cavity of the common nerve. 
And the points which are similarly situated in relation to [that point] will be 
displaced from the point on the common axis where the lines meet in the 
common nerve's cavity in the direction in which both points on the eyes’ 
surfaces are displaced, and the distance of [those points] from the point [on the 
common axis] will be in accordance with the distance of the two points [on the 
eves’ surfaces] from the axes. And the two forms that occur in the two 
similarly situated points on the eyes’ surfaces will come to that one and the 
same point in the cavity of the common nerve, where they will coincide with 
one another and become one form. And the points on the object’s surface that 
ill 12a surround the point on the common axis will each be | similarly situated in 
relation to the axes of the eyes, and therefore the form of every one of these 
points will occur in the eyes in two places similarly situated with respect to the 
two points in the eyes which are similarly situated in relation to the two points 
that lie on the axes in the surfaces of the eyes. Thus two forms of the object on 
which the three axes meet will occur in the middle of the eyes’ surfaces; and 
two forms of the point at which the three axes meet will occur in the points 
that lie on the axes in the eyes’ surfaces; and every point in the two forms will 
occupy two similarly situated places in the eyes; then both forms will proceed 
from the eyes’ surfaces to the cavity of the common nerve: the two forms at 
the points on the two axes will proceed to the point on the common axis and 
become one; and every pair of forms at two similarly situated points in the 
eyes will proceed to a single point among those surrounding the point on the 
common axis; and thus the two forms of the whole object will coincide with 
one another and become one, and the object will be perceived single, 
in 12b [16] This, then, is j the manner in which the two forms produced in the 

sight for a single object similarly situated in relation to the eyes become one, 
and the manner in which the sentient perceives a single object as one though 
two forms of it are produced in the eyes. 

[17] Now if the two forms that lie in the points at the middles of the eyes’ 
surfaces and on the two axes proceed to the point on the common axis, then 
every two forms that occur in the eyes’ surfaces at the points on the two axes 
will invariably proceed to that same point on the common axis inside the 
common nerve. For the points through which the two visual axes pass do not 
vary but remain the same, since the position of the two axes relative to the eyes 
remains the same and unchanged and their location in the eyes never varies. 


Thus the point in the cavity of the common nerve which is reached by the 
forms produced in the eye’s surfaces at the points on the two axes, will always 
u be one and the same point, i.e. the point on the common axis | where the two 
lines drawn from the apertures’ centres through the middles of the cavities of 
the nerves meet. Let us call this point on the common axis within the cavity of 
the common nerve ‘the Centre’. 

[18] This having been demonstrated it now becomes clear that when any 
object is perceived with both eyes, while the axes of the eyes meet at a point in 
its surface, then its form will occur in the middles of the surfaces of both eyes; 
so that these forms will then proceed from the eyes to one and the same place 
in the common nerve where the two forms will coincide with one another and 
become one. The two forms of the point in the object where the two axes meet 
will occur in two points of the axes on the eyes’ surfaces, then they will 
proceed from these two points to the central point in the cavity of the common 
nerve, whether the point on the object where the axes meet lies on the 

;i r ;b common axis or outside it. But if the object is on the common axis, | and the 
two axes meet at that point in it that lies on the common axis, then the two 
forms of that point will be more similar to each other, because that point will 
be equidistant from the two points of the axes that lie in the eyes’ surfaces 
where the forms of that point occur, since the axes in this case will be equal in 
length. Similarly, every point near that point will appear to the sense to be 
equally distant from the two points on the eyes’ surfaces where its two forms 
will occur; the two forms of that point will thus be more similar to one 
another; therefore, the two forms produced in the surfaces of the eyes by the 
object that lies on the common axis will be more closely similar than the two 
forms of an object outside the common axis; and, therefore, when the form of 
an object that lies on the common axis occurs in the cavity of the common 
nerve, it will be sharper. 1 If, however, the object lies outside the common 

'll 14a axis, but is not excessively far from it, then the two forms produced by it in | 
the eyes will not greatly differ, and therefore the form of it produced in the 
common nerve will not be double. 

[19] If the object lies outside the common axis and is excessively far from it, 
while the axes of the eyes meet at a point in it, the form produced by it in the 
common nerve will be one, and the form of that point in it where the axes 
meet will occur in the central point, but the object’s form will not be distinct 
but confused. 1 Thus, in any event, the form of that point in the object where 
the axes meet will occur in the central point inside the cavity of the common 
nerve, whether the meeting point lies on the common axis or outside it, and 
the remainder of the object’s form will surround the central point. If the object 

11 ub is of a small size and approximately equal dimensions, | and it lies on the 
common axis or close to it, the form produced by it in the common nerve will 


Optics 


236 

be one and also distinct, 2 because every point in it will be similarly situated 
with respect to the eyes, as was already shown. If the object is of a large size 
and broad dimensions, and it lies on the common axis, then the form of that 
part of it which surrounds the point where the axes meet will occur in the 
common nerve as one distinct form, and the form of the remaining parts will 
be continuous with the form of that part, and thus the form of the object as a 
whole will in any case be one, though the form of the object’s extremities and 
borders, and of all that is far from the meeting point, will be undefined and 
indistinct. 3 Because it is not the case that the two forms of every point that is 
far from the meeting point will be produced in two points whose positions 
relative to the eyes are extremely similar; rather the form of such a point will 
[15a occupy two points | in the eyes which are similarly situated in respect of 

1 direction, but may or may not be similarly situated in respect of distance from 

the axes. The form of a point that is not at equal distances from the axes will 
occur in the cavity of the common nerve at two points displaced from the 
Centre in the same direction, but they will be double. The effect of that on an 
object of the same colour will not be great, because of the similarity of the 
| colour and the continuity of the form; but an effect will be produced if the 

object is of various colours or if lines, designs or fine detail exist in it, so that 
the form of its edges will be undefined and indistinct. 

[20] If the object is large and of broad dimensions, and the eyes ’ axes remain 
fixed at a point in it, its form will appear single, the meeting point in it and 
those around it will be distinct and well defined, but the points near its edges 

ti i 5 b and borders will be indefinite and indistinct 1 — | on two counts: one is that the 
object’s edges are perceived through rays that are far from the [common] axis 
and, therefore, will not be perfectly clear; the second is that not every point in 
the object will produce its form in the same point inside the common nerve, 
j The form of such an object will become distinct only when the two axes move 

over all of its parts. If the object lies outside the common axis and far from it, 
its form will not be distinct, because no point in it will be similarly situated 
relative to the two eyes, since no point in such an object will be equally distant 
either from the points in the surfaces of the eyes where its two forms will occur 
or from the axes. If, however, both eyes turn towards such an object so that 
the common axis may fall upon the object or close to it, then its form will 
become distinct. 

[21] Again, if sight perceives several objects at once, while the two axes 

1 1 6a meet and remain fixed j on it, then, assuming the remaining objects to lie 

outside the [common] axis, and the object on which the two axes meet to be 
small, the form of the object on which the two axes meet will occur in the 
cavity of the common nerve as a single, distinct form. If the object lies on the 
common axis, its form will be more distinct than that of an object lying 


III. 2 


237 


outside that axis, even though the two axes may meet on it. Of the remaining 
objects which are perceived at that moment, those that are close to the object 
on which the two axes meet, provided they are small, will produce in the 
cavity of the common nerve single forms the definition ot which has not been 
impaired, since these forms will be close to the Centre. And of the same 
remaining objects, the form of one that is far from the object on which the two 
axes meet, will occur in the cavity of the common nerve as an indefinite form. 1 
(I i For this form will either become two forms | that intermingle because they an 

on the same side and no great difference exists between their positions in 
respect of distance, given that the two forms will overlap if the difference 
between their distances is slight, or the form of some parts of that object will 
be double but the form of other parts will be single, and thus the form of such 
objects will in any case be undefined, the reason being the difference in 
position between the rays drawn to the object and the fact that those rays are 
far from the two axes. Thus the form of an object that lies aside from the two 
axes and far from the meeting point of these axes will be undefined and 
indistinct as long as the object remains distant from that meeting point, but the 
form of the object will become distinct when the axes move and meet on it. 

[22] If, however, the two axes meet on a visible object, while the eyes 
in 17a perceive another object closer to or farther from them | than that on which the 

two axes meet, while at the same time being located between those axes, then 
that object will be differently situated with reference to the eyes in respect of 
direction. Because if it lies between the two axes, then: it will be to the right of 
one of them and to the left of the other; the rays drawn to it from one eye will 
be to the right of the axis and those drawn to it from the other eye to the left of 
the axis; therefore, its position relative to the eyes will differ in respect to 
direction. The forms of such an object will occur in differently situated places 
in the eyes; the two forms produced by it in the eyes will proceed to two 
different places in the cavity of the common nerve that lie aside from the 
Centre, and thus will be two non-coincident forms. 

[23] Again, if the object lies on one of the axes and outside the other, it will 
produce in the cavity of the common nerve two non-coincident forms, one in 

in 17b the Centre, | and the other displaced from the Centre. 

[24] These, then, are the ways in which the forms of visible objects are 
produced in the eyes and in the cavity of the common nerve. 

[25] We shall now describe how all these states of affairs can be experi- 
mentally examined so that certainty will be achieved. 

[26] Take a light-weight wooden board of a pale colour, one cubit in length 
and four fairly large digits wide. Its surface should be even and smooth and its 
longitudinal and latitudinal edges should be parallel. Draw two intersecting 


Optics 


239 


238 

diameters on it, and from the point of intersection draw a straight line parallel 
to its length and another straight line perpendicular to the first, middle line. 
Paint these lines in different bright colours to make them visible, and paint the 
11 1 8a diameters in one colour. In the middle of the board’s shorter edge and [ at the 

end of the middle straight line between the diameters, make a round but 
narrowing opening whose wider part at the beginning is large enough for 
inserting the bridge of the nose so that the board may rest upon it in such a way 
that the board’s corners will be extremely close to the middles of the eyes’ 
surfaces, so close in fact that they almost touch them without actually doing 
so. 



[27] Let the board be like the figure ABCD [Fig. III. 1]: the diameters are 
AD , BG; the intersection point is K ; the longitudinal line extending in its 
middle is EATZ; the line intersecting this line at right angles is HKT; and the 
opening in the middle of the board’s latitudinal side is contained by the line 
MEN. 


III. 2 

[28] Once the board has been prepared and the lines have been drawn in it in 
this manner, take a small piece of white wax and make three small cylindrical 
objects out of it and paint them in three different colours; place | one of the 
objects in the middle of the board at point K\ fasten it there so that it cannot be 
removed from this position and let it stand upright on the board; place the 
other two objects at the ends of the transverse line, at points H, T; the three 
objects will lie on one line. The experimenter should then raise the board and, 
placing the opening in the middle of its side on his nose, insert the bridge of his 
nose in it so that the corners of the board will be close to touching the middles 
of the surfaces of the eyes. The experimenter should then endeavour to look at 
the object in the middle of the board, fixing his gaze intensely on it. When the 
experimenter does this, the axes of the two eyes will meet on that object and 
either coincide with or be parallel to the diameters; the common axis we have 
already defined will coincide with the line extending through the length of the 
board. 

; ..,a | [29] While in this situation, the experimenter should contemplate every- 

thing on the surface of the board. He will see each of the three objects at points 
H, K and T single, and will also find line HKT to be one. 1 But line EZ, which 
extends through the length of the board, will appear as two lines intersecting 
at the middle object. Similarly, when contemplating the diameters while in 
this situation, he will find them to be four, each of them appearing double. 

[30] The experimenter should then gaze at one of the objects at points H, T, 
so that the two axes will meet at one of the extreme objects. Let him at the 
same time contemplate [the board]; he will find each of those objects to be one, 

:u 19b and the transverse line also | will be one; but the middle line extending through 
the board’s length will appear double, and so will each of the diameters. 

[31] Having perceived these lines and objects on the board, the experi- 
menter should now put down the board, remove the objects at point H, T and 
fix them on the longitudinal line EZ, one at point L towards the eyes, and the 
other at F behind the middle object. He should now place the board in its 
former position close to the eyes, and again fix the eyes on the middle object. 
He will find the two objects to be four and will find them displaced from the 
middle, two to the right and two to the left; he will find them on two lines 
which are in fact the single middle line appearing double, and will find two of 
the four objects on one line, the other two on the other. 

[32] Similarly, if, having removed the two objects, he now fixes them on 
one of the diameters, one [object] towards the eye and the other behind the 
middle object, <he will find them to be four. For each of the diameters will 
appear double, and thus there will appear on each of the [two] lines, which are 
in reality one diameter, two objects, one towards the eye and the other beyond 
the middle object. > x Similarly, | if he fixes one of the objects on one of the 


2 40 


Optics 


III. 2 


241 


diameters and the other on the other, so that both objects are towards the eyes, he 
will find them to be four, two of them nearer together and two farther apart. And, 
similarly, if he fixes the two objects on the diameters behind the middle object: he 
will find them to be four, two of them closer together and two farther apart. 

[33] The experimenter should then remove the two objects, fix one of them 
on the edge of the board behind point H but very close to it, e. g. at point /, 
then return the board to its former position and fix his gaze on the middle 
object; the object at point I will appear to him single. Then, in that situation, 
let him remove the object from point / and fix it again on the edge of the board 
behind I at a point distant from H, such as Q, then gaze at the middle object: 
the object at point Q will appear to him double. 

[34] The experimenter will find all these things as we have described them 
20b as long as | he fixes his gaze on the middle object, or an object fixed on the 

transverse line, or any point on the transverse line, and as long as the two axes 
meet on the middle object or at a point on the transverse line. If, while in this 
situation, the experimenter fixes his gaze on an object or point outside the 
transverse line, then the middle object too will be seen double; if the other 
objects occupy points H, T, then each of them will be seen double. Then, if 
the experimenter again gazes at the middle object or at a point in the transverse 
line, the former state of affairs will be repeated. 

[35] To demonstrate: in the figure ABGD , draw lines BH, BI, BQ; line HB 
will be greater than line BT; but line HK is equal to line KT; therefore, angle 
TBK is greater than angle KBH. 

21a [36] But angle TBK is equal to angle HAK ; therefore, angle HAK | is 

greater than angle HBK. 

[37] Therefore, the distance of line AH from axis AK is greater than that of 
line BH from axis BK, but the difference between the two distances is small 
because the difference between angles HAK , HBK is small. 

[38] Now the object at point H is always seen with both eyes as one if the 
two axes meet on the object at point K; and lines AH , BH, are in the same 
direction as the two rays proceeding to the object at point H, if the axes meet 
on the object at point K ; 

[39] and similarly with the object at point I: the rays proceeding to it will 
have the same direction as lines Al , B/, and it will be seen single; 

[40] and angles 1 AK, IBK , too, will not differ greatly, because angle HBI 
21 b will have no sensible magnitude if point I lies very close | to point H. 

[41] From this it is clear that an object on the same side of both axes will be 
seen single with both eyes, provided that no great discrepancy exists between 
the distances of the rays 1 drawn to it from the two eyes. 

[42] But angles QAK , QBK , are appreciably different; and the object at 
point Q is seen double when the two axes meet on the object at point K. 


[43] It is therefore clear from this that when the positions of the rays drawn 
to an object from the two eyes differ greatly with respect to their distance from 
the axes, then that object will be seen double, even if it is situated on the same 
side of both axes. 

[44] But line EKZ does not lie on the same side with respect to both of the 
visual axes. For the rays drawn to section EK from the right eye will be on the 

m 22a left of axis AK , and the rays drawn to that section from the left eye | will be on 

the right of axis BK; again, the rays drawn to section KZ from the right eye 
will be on the right of axis AK, and the rays drawn to it from the left eye will 
be on the left of axis BK; and, therefore, the rays drawn to it will lie on 
different sides. But rays drawn from the eyes to any point on this line will be 
equally distant from the axes. And this line, and everything on it other than 
the middle object, is invariably seen double, provided that the axes meet at the 
middle object. 

[45] Therefore, it is clear from this that an object that lies on different sides 
of the axes will aways be seen double, even if the rays drawn to it from both 
eyes are equally distant from the axes. The reason is that any two rays drawn 
from the eyes to a point in the object will lie on different sides, and therefore 
the two forms of every point on the object will occur in two points in the 
cavity of the common nerve on either side of the Centre. 

in 22b [46] The case is similar with the diameters: the rays | drawn to one of them 

from the eye next to it will [proceed] from the middle of the eye, or close to the 
axis, above and below the axis, 1 whereas rays drawn to it from the other eye 
will be inclined to the other axis. But those drawn from the right eye to the left 
diameter will be on the left of the axis, whereas those drawn from the left eye 
to the right diameter will be on the right of the axis. 2 And each of these 
diameters, and all objects on them, will be seen double, with the exception of 
the middle object if the axes meet on it. 

[47] It is clear from this case that an object opposite the middle of one eye 
and displaced from the middle of the other eye will be seen double. For the 
form of the point that occurs in the middle of one eye will proceed to the 
Centre, whereas the form of the point that is displaced from the middle of the 
other eye will occur in a point other than the Centre and its displacement from 
the Centre will be according to the point’s displacement on the surface of the 
eye. 

Hi 23a [48] It is clearly evident | from all the experimentation we have described, 

and from our explanation, that the object on which the two axes meet is 
invariably seen single; that an object will also be seen single if the rays that 
meet on it lie in the same direction and there is no great discrepancy between 
their distances from the axis; 1 that an object will be seen double if the rays that 
meet on it have the same direction but differ greatly with respect to their 


242 


Optics 


distance from the two axes; that an object will be seen double if it is perceived 
through rays of different directions though their distances from the two axes 
may be equal; and that all this will be so as long as the two axes meet on a single 
object. 

[49] Now all familiar objects face both eyes when they are regarded by both 
eyes; thus the two visual axes always meet upon them; the remaining rays that 

123b meet on every point | in them lie on the same side; and no great difference 
exists between their distances from the two axes; therefore, every familiar 
object is seen single by both eyes. It is only rarely that objects are seen double, 
for an object is seen double only if it differs greatly relative to the two eyes 
with regard to direction or with regard to distance or both, and this happens 
only rarely. 

[50] We have now shown, both by reasoning and experiment, the reason 
why each of the familiar objects is seen single by both eyes. 

[51] If the experimenter removes the object in the middle of the board, and, 
looking at the intersection point in the middle of the board, he contemplates 
the lines on the board, he will find the two diameters to be four, of which two 
will be closer together than the others, 1 and all of which intersect at the middle 

1 24a point on the common axis where the two diameters intersect; | he will also find 
each member of the more divergent pair to be farther off from the middle than 
its true divergence. Then, covering one eye, the experimenter will see the two 
diameters as two, and will see the distance between them larger than their true 
distance which reaches its maximum width at the latitudinal edge of the 
board, 2 while the diameter farther off from the middle will appear to be the 
one next to the covered eye. 

[52] From this it is manifest that the diameters that appear to be closer 
together are those each of which is seen by the eye next to it, and that the 
farther diameters are those each of which is seen by the eye that lies over to one 
side of it. The reason why two of the four appear closer together is this: when 
the two axes meet at the middle object, then each of the two diameters will be 
perceived by the eye next to it through rays that are very close to the axis; thus 
their two forms will be very close to the Centre within the common nerve, 

124b and their point of intersection will be | at the Centre itself, and thus the 
diameters will appear to be closer together and close to the middle. On the 
other hand, two of the four diameters will be farther from one another because 
each of them is also seen by the other eye that lies aside from it and is therefore 
seen through rays farther away from the axis; moreover, one of the diameters 
will be perceived by rays to the right of the axis while the other will be 
perceived by rays to the left of the other axis; thus their two forms will occur in 
the cavity of the common nerve apart from one another, because they will 


III. 2 


243 


occur on two opposite sides of the Centre and far from it. Therefore there will 
exist for the two diameters two forms which are closer together and two 
farther apart. The reason why each of the farther diameters is perceived farther 
from the middle than its true distance, is that the distance between the two 
diameters is perceived by each of the eyes to be greater than its true 
magnitude. This appears if the experimenter covers one eye and looks with 
the other. The reason why the distance between the two diameters appears to 
the experimenter wider than its true magnitude if, with one eye being 

• :sa covered, he looks with the other, is that that distance | is very close to the eye, 
and every thing close to the eye appears greater than its true magnitude. The 
reason for this will become clear in its [appropriate] place when we discuss the 
errors of sight. 1 

[53] From the experimental examination of the conditions of the diameters 
on the board and of the objects fixed on them at points other than the middle, it 
is manifest that every object lying on the common axis and perceived by 
means of the radial axis will appear in its own place, whether perception of it is 
acquired with one eye and one visual axis or with both eyes and both axes. It is 
manifest, moreover, that every object perceived by one eye and by means of 
the radial axis, but which does not lie on the common axis, will appear at a 
place closer to the common axis than its true place. The same also holds for 
what is perceived through rays other than the axis; for if sight perceives an 
object as it is, and the form of that object occurs at a single place in the cavity of 

:ii 25b the common nerve, so that the parts of it are joined together | in the way they 
are in the object; and if the point of the object that lies on the radial axis, but not 
on the common axis, appears at a place closer to the common axis than its true 
place; then the remaining points, too, will appear at a place closer to the 
common axis than their true place, since they are continuous with the part at 
the extremity of the axis. 

[54] If the two visual axes meet on an object outside the common axis, then 
the same state of affairs will hold for it, i.e. it will appear at a position closer to 
the common axis than its true position. But this case is rarely met with. For 
when the two visual axes meet at an object, then in most cases the common 
axis will pass through that object; the two axes do not meet at an object outside 
the common axis unless one has exerted oneself or unless some obstruction 
has forced the sight to exert itself. This condition is not therefore observable in 
familiar objects because when it occurs for one of them it must exist for all 

!I1 contiguous | objects, and, in consequence, the mutual positions of the objects 
will not vary. But if no change occurs in the position of that object relative to 
neighbouring objects, then no change in its position will be visible. For this 
reason, then, that state of affairs will not be apparent when it occurs in familiar 
objects. But when it is experimentally examined in the preceding manner, it 


I 2 44 Optics 

will be evident that it holds for all objects on which the two visual axes meet if 
these objects lie outside the common axis. 

[55] Again, let the experimenter take a sheet of paper from which he must 
cut three small and equal strips; on one of them let him write some arbitrary 
word in a clear hand, then write the same word with the same size and shape 
on the other two strips. Let him fix the object at the middle of the board as 
before, and also fix one of the two objects at point H. He must then attach one 
of the three strips to the object in the middle of the board and one of the others 

ii -6b to the object | at point H, making sure that [the second strip] has the same 
position as the first. Let him bring the board close to his eyes, as before, and 
gaze at the strip on the middle object and contemplate it. He will have a 
distinct perception of the word written on it, and at the same time perceive the 
other strip and the word written on it but not as clearly as the corresponding 
word on the middle strip; the latter will be clearer and more distinct though it 
has the same shape, configuration and size as the other. 

[56] Then the experimenter should pick up the third strip with the hand that 

| is close to point H and place it in the direction of the two strips on the board so 

that it appears on the rectilinear extension of the transverse line in the surface 
of the board, and let its position be at a distance from the board. Such a 
direction we call ‘the frontal direction’. The experimenter must make sure that 
the third strip and the word written on it should have the same orientation 
[ 1 27a as the other two strips | on the board. Let him now gaze at the middle strip 
with both eyes. He will in this situation perceive the third strip provided it is 
not too far from the board. But he will find the form of the word in it confused 
and incomprehensible, unlike the form of the corresponding word in the 
middle of the board, and unlike that of the word at point H, as long as he 
continues to gaze with both eyes at the strip in the middle of the board. 

[57] Let the experimenter then remove the object and the strip at point H, 
and attach the strip in his hand close to that which is attached to the middle 
object, making sure that the strip stands upright on the transverse line, then 
gaze again at the middle strip. He will have a clear and distinct perception of 
the words in both strips, there being no sensible difference in clarity and 
distinctness between the forms of the two words. 

[58] The experimenter should then gently move the strip along the 
1 27b transverse line in the board, making sure | that its orientation remains the 

same, and, as he does this, direct his gaze at the middle strip while closely 
contemplating the two strips. He will find that as the moving strip gets farther 
from the middle, the word that is on it becomes less and less clear. When it 
reaches point H, the form of the word on it will be comprehensible, but not as 
clear as it was when it touched the middle strip. 


III. 2 245 

[59] Let the experimenter move the strip again off the board, gradually 
pushing it away along the transverse line and closely contemplating [it] while 
fixing his gaze on the middle strip. He will find that as the moving strip gets 
farther from the middle, the word that is on it decreases in clarity until he 
ceases to comprehend or ascertain its form. Then if he moves it further, he will 
find that the form of that word becomes more confused and obscure. 

[60] Again, let the experimenter cover the eye that is closer to point T, and, 
having placed the board in its proper position, gaze at the middle strip with the 

in 28a eye that is closer to point H. Let him also fix the other strip | beside the middle 
strip as he did at first. He will find the word in the middle strip to be clear and 
distinct, and also find the word in the other strip to be clear, there being no 
sensible difference between them in clarity. He should then move the second 
strip as he did before while directing his gaze to the middle strip and closely 
contemplating [the second strip] . He will find that the word in the second strip 
decreases in clarity as it moves. When it reaches point H the difference in its 
clarity at this position and when it touched the middle strip will be appreci- 
able. Then, moving this [second] strip out of the board, as he did earlier, and 
closely contemplating it while gazing at the middle strip, he will find that the 
moved strip becomes more obscure as it gets farther from the middle. 

[61] It is evident from this experiment that of the visible objects facing the 
eyes and binocularly perceived, the clearest is that which lies where the two 
axes meet, and the closer the object is from this point the clearer it will be; and 

11128b thus the form of an object far from the meeting point of the axes | will be 
confused and indistinct, though perceived with both eyes. It is also manifest 
from this experiment that of the objects facing us, and perceived with one eye, 
the clearest is that which is seen by means of the radial axis, and the closer an 
object is to the axis the clearer it will be; and thus the form of an object far from 
the radial axis will be confused and indistinct. It appears from this experiment 
also that sight does not gain a distinct perception of a large object unless it 
moves the radial axis over the object’s dimensions and over all of its parts, 
whether vision is achieved with two eyes or with one eye; when the eyes are 
kept motionless in front of the large object, sight will fail to have a distinct 
perception of it, and only perceive distinctly those parts of it that lie on or near 
the axis, while indistinctly perceiving the remaining parts, even when the 
object faces the eyes and regardless of whether vision is achieved with two 
eyes or with one eye. 

[62] Further, let the experimenter take a piece of paper four digits by four in 
!, i w size, and set down in it some minute words in lines; the script must be | clear 

and comprehensible. The experimenter should then bring the board close to 
his eyes as before, then set up the paper on the transverse line in the middle of 


Optics 


III. 2 


247 


246 

the board and gaze with both eyes at the middle of the paper and contemplate 
it. He will find the script on the paper to be clear, comprehensible and legible. 
But he will find the words in the middle of the paper to be clearer than those at 
its borders, provided the gaze is directed at the middle of the paper and the 
eyes do not move over all of its dimensions. 

[63] He should then incline the paper so that it intersects the transverse line 
at the point in the middle of the board, i.e. the intersection point, and let the 
paper’s inclination to the transverse line be slight; then let him gaze with both 
eyes at the middle of the paper. He will find the words comprehensible, but 
not as clear as they were when the paper was in the frontal position. 

[64] The experimenter should then increase the paper’s inclination, keeping 
the middle of its edge at the point of intersection, then gaze again at its middle 

ill 29b with both eyes. He will find the words less | clear than before. Let him 
gradually increase the inclination while the middle of the paper’s edge remains 
at the intersection point, and repeatedly contemplate the paper at every 
inclination. He will find that the words become confused as the paper is 
inclined. And the more the paper is inclined the more confused the words will 
become, until the paper approaches the line extending along the middle of the 
board’s length. He will then find the words so confused that he will not be able 
to read them or comprehend them or ascertain their form. 

[65] The experimenter should then put the paper back in the first position, 
setting it up on the transverse line, and, with one eye covered, look at the 
paper with the other. He will find the words clear, comprehensible and 
legible. Let him then incline the paper as in the first case and look at it with one 
eye; the words will be less clear then in the frontal position. Then he should 
gradually increase the paper’s inclination and repeatedly contemplate it; he 
will find that as the inclination increases, the words will become less clear until 

11130a the paper approaches the diameter that is | close to the viewing eye. Con- 
templating [the paper] in this situation with one eye he will find the writing so 
confused that he will not be able to read it or comprehend it. 

[66] It is manifest from this experiment that the clearest object on the 
common axis is that frontally oriented before the eyes, and the closer the 
object is to the frontal direction the clearer it will be, and that the form of an 
object that is excessively inclined to the radial axis will be confused and 
incomprehensible, whether vision is acquired with both eyes or with one eye. 

[67] The experimenter should then put the object back on the board, 
attaching it to the intersection point in the middle, as in the first experiment. 
Then let him set up the paper on one of the sections of the transverse line in the 
frontal direction and gaze with both eyes at the middle object. Under these 
conditions he will perceive the paper and the writing in it, but he will find that 


whereas words close to the middle object are clear, those farther from it are 
indeterminate and obscure; that again words close to the object are compre- 
. r hensible | and legible when gazing at the middle object; that words farther off 
from the middle object are indistinct, illegible and incomprehensible; and that 
the farther the words are from that object the more confused they become. 

[68] Under the same conditions let the experimenter slightly incline the 
paper so that it intersects the transverse line at a point on one of its sections, 
then gaze at the middle object. He will find that the writing on the paper is in 
this case less clear than it was when frontally directed. Then, as he increases the 
paper’s inclination while gazing at the middle object, the writing will become 
confused, incomprehensible and unclear. 

[69] The experimenter should then cover one eye, put the paper in its first 
position, setting it up on that section of the transverse line which is close to the 
viewing eye, and with this eye gaze at the middle object. He will again 
perceive the writing on the paper, and find that words close to that object are 
clearer than those farther off, and that words far off from that object are 

: 1 1 indistinct | and incomprehensible. 

[70] Then let the experimenter incline the paper so that it intersects the 
transverse line at a point on the section on which it was set up, and look at the 
middle object with the same eye as before. He will find the writing on the 
paper indistinct, incomprehensible and more confused than it was when the 
paper was in the frontal direction. Then, as he gradually increases the 
inclination, the writing will become more and more confused. 

[71] It is manifest from this experimental examination that a frontally 
directed object will be more clearly perceived than an inclined one, even when 
it lies outside the radial axis; and that the form of an excessively inclined object 
will be indeterminate, even when the object lies on the radial axis, 1 whether 
vision is acquired with both eyes or with one. 

[72] Again, let the experimenter remove the object from the board and set up 
the paper on the board’s [far] end, so that the edge of the paper coincides with 

ub that edge ofthe board represented by line GD; then let him gaze with both eyes | 

at the middle of the paper. He will find the writing clear and comprehensible. 

[73] Then let him incline the paper so that it intersects the board’s breadth at 
point Z in the middle of it, then gaze with both eyes at the middle ofthe paper. 
He will find the writing less clear than before. Then, as he gradually increases 
the paper’s inclination, he will find that the writing decreases in clarity. When 
the inclination becomes excessive, he will find the writing very confused, just 
as he found it when he tested it at the middle of the board. The result is the 
same when the writing is tested at this position using one eye. 

[74] The experimenter should then place the object at point Z, and set up 
the paper on one of the sections of the board’s breadth at its edge, just as he did 


17 


248 


Optics 


III. 2 


249 


at the middle of the board, then gaze at the middle object while contemplating 
! and testing the paper. Let him next position the paper so that it intersects again 

the line along the board’s breadth and test it. He will find it in the same 
condition as he did when it occupied the middle of the board, whether he tests 
it with both eyes or with one eye. 

[75] The experimenter should further examine the small strips, already 
ii 32a described, | at the edge of the board as he examined them at the middle. He 

will find the situation to be the same as he found it when fhe examined them] at 
the middle. That is, he will find the word in the middle strip clearer than that in 
the extreme strip. And the farther the extreme strip is removed from the 
middle, the more confused the word that is in it will become. But he will find 
that the distance from the middle, at which the extreme word becomes 
confused when examining the board’s edge, will depend on the distance from 
the middle, at which the extreme word becomes confused when examining 
the board’s middle, because it will depend on the distance of the extreme ray 
from the axis. Thus the ratio of the distance from the middle form, at which 
the extreme form becomes confused, to the distance of the middle form from 
| the eye will be the same whether the experiment concerns the middle of the 

board or the board’s edge. 

[76] Again, let the experimenter raise the board, place the paper in the 
frontal position at a point beyond the board’s length, but not so far as to make 
the writing in it illegible, then contemplate the paper and read the writing in it. 

[1 32b Then let him slightly incline the paper | at that point. He will find it less clear. 

Then, as he gradually increases the inclination, he will find that the paper 
decreases in clarity. Then, when the paper is so inclined as to approach the 
position of the ray extending to its middle, the experimenter will find the 
writing so confused as to be illegible and incomprehensible. This he will find 
to be the case whether he performs the experiment using both eyes or one eye. 

[77] And, similarly, if he fixes one of the small strips in the frontal position 
at a point facing the eyes at a distance larger than the board’s length, and gazes 
at it with both eyes, while the other strip has been placed in the frontal 
direction at a point over to the right or left of that strip, he will find it [the 
displaced strip] less clear. 

[78] Then, availing himself of a means for moving the second strip so that it 
gradually recedes from the strip at which he gazes, he will find that the form of 
the word in the extreme strip becomes more confused as it recedes from the 

133a second strip, until | it becomes obscure and incomprehensible. He will also 
find this to be the case if he tests these two strips with one eye. 

[79] It is manifest from all these experiments that the clearest visible object 
at all distances is that which lies on the radial axis; that an object closer to the 
axis will be clearer than one farther from it; that the form of an object 


excessively far from the axis will be confused and unidentifiable by sight 
whether vision is acquired with one eye or with both eyes; that a frontally 
oriented object will be clearer at all distances from an inclined one, and the 
closer an object is to the frontal position the clearer it will be; and that the form 
of an object excessively inclined to the radial lines will be very confused and 
unidentifiable by sight — whether vision is acquired with one eye or with both 
eyes, and whether the object lies on the axis or outside it. 

[80] [The following is] the reason why the form of an excessively inclined 
hi -b object is confused though the object is at a moderate distance | and though its 

size is perceived as it is, and why a frontally oriented object is more clearly 
perceived than an oblique one. The form of an excessively inclined object will 
be compressed on the surface of the eye on account of this inclination. For the 
angle subtended at the centre of the eye by an excessively inclined object will 
be small; and the part of the eye in which the form of that object occurs will be 
much smaller than that in which it occurs when the object is frontally oriented; 
further, the angles subtended at the eye by the small parts of the object will be 
insensible on account of the excessive inclination, since the two lines drawn 
from the centre of the eye to the extremities of a small and excessively inclined 
part will almost coincide and become one line, and, therefore, the sentient will 
neither perceive the angle between them nor the part which they cut off from 
the surface of the eye. 

[81] Thus the form of an excessively inclined object will be too compressed in 
the eye, so that the small parts of that object will not be sensed, and for this reason 
the object’s form will be indeterminate. Sight will not perceive the subtle features 

in 34a that may exist | in such an object on account of the smallness of their parts and the 
compression of the form. The case with a frontal object is different, for the form of 
such an object occurs in the eye with the same order it has on the surface of the 
object, and its perceptible small parts will be clear. Ifthe small parts of an object are 
clear, and they are ordered on the eye in the same way as they are on the object’s 
surface, then the form of the object will be clear and definite. 

[82] In general, sight will have no ascertained perception of fine detail, or of 
the minute parts or [proper] order of an object’s parts unless the form of that 
object is traced out 1 on the surface of the sentient organ, and unless every part 
of it occurs in a sensible part of that organ. When the object is excessively 
inclined its form will not be traced out in the eye, nor will the form of every 
one of its small parts occupy a sensible part of the eye. Thus the form of an 
object will not be traced out on the surface of the eye, nor will the form of 

[| f ub every part of it occupy a sensible part | of the eye unless the object lies in the 
frontal position or is only slightly inclined, provided also that it lies at a 
moderate distance [from the eyes] relative to its [visible] properties. 2 


250 


Optics 


251 


[83] The reason why the size of an excessively inclined but moderately 
distant object is perceived as it is in spite of the object’s excessive inclination is 
that such a perception is due not simply to the form itself which occurs in the 
eye but to an inference that surpasses the form, 1 That is, it is due to sight’s 
perception of the discrepancy between the distances [from the eye] of the 
object’s two extremities in addition to perceiving the magnitude of the form. 
For when sight perceives the discrepancy between the distances of the two 
extremities of an excessively inclined object, and perceives the excessiveness 
of this discrepancy, the faculty of judgement will imagine the position of that 
object and perceive its magnitude in accordance with the difference between 
those two distances, and in accordance with the magnitude of the part [of the 
eye] in which the form occurs and the size of the angle subtended by that part 
at the centre of the eye. That perception, therefore, is not simply due to the 
form itself. Rather, when the faculty of judgement perceives the difference 
between the distances of the two extremities of an excessively inclined object, 
thus perceiving the object’s inclination, it will sense the compression suffered 

I ; sa by the object; therefore, it will perceive the object’s magnitude! when it 
perceives the degree of the object’s inclination, not according to the magni- 
tude of the form, but according to the object’s orientation. 2 But the small parts 
of an object and the fine detail that may exist in it cannot be perceived by 
means of inference unless those parts and detail are sensed by sight. 

[84] The indeterminateness of the [perceived] form of an excessively 
oblique object is therefore due to the compression of the form in the eye and to 
inapparentness of the object’s small parts. On the other hand, clarity of the 
form of a moderately distant single object is due to the form’s being traced out 
in the eye as it is [in the object’s surface] and to the eye’s sensing of the object’s 
small parts. 

[85] We have shown the reason why the form of an excessively oblique 
object is obscure whereas the form of a frontal object is clear. 

[86] Having made clear all these things let us now begin our discussion of 
the errors of sight and show their causes and their kinds. 

CHAPTER 3 

ON THE CAUSES OF ERRORS OF SIGHT 

[1] It was shown in the First Book that sight does not directly perceive an 
[35b object that exists with it in the same atmosphere | unless the object fulfils a 

number of conditions in combination, namely distance, opposition, 
luminosity, a sizable magnitude, opacity or a certain degree thereof, and 
uninterrupted transparency of the intermediate air between it and the eye or 


III. 3 

absence of opaque bodies from that air. If the object fulfils all these conditions 
and the viewing eye is sound and free from defects or impediments, sight will 
perceive the object. If one of these conditions is lacking in the eye or in the 
object, no perception of the object will take place. 

[2] And it was shown in the Second Book that sight can perceive visible 
objects only in time, and so, time, too, is one of the conditions of vision. Thus 
vision is not achieved without the combined presence of these conditions. 

[3] Moreover, if the eye is defective or there exists in it some impediment 
which, nevertheless, does not totally prevent it from perceiving the object, 
sight will not achieve true perception as long as the impediment or defect 
remains; such perception can only take place if the eye is free from detects and 
and impediments or if it is not greatly affected by them. That | being so, 
soundness and unimpairedness of the eye is one condition for perceiving an 
object as it is. 

[4] And it was shown in the preceding chapter that sight will not achieve a 
distinct perception of an object that lies far outside the radial axis, even when 
the object is frontally oriented. It was also shown that sight will not have a 
distinct perception of an object that is excessively oblique to the radial lines, 
even when it lies on the radial axis opposite the middle of the eye. That being 
so, an object will not be perceived as it is, even when it is opposite the eye, 
unless it lies in a certain position, that is, it must be frontally oriented, or close 
to frontality, relative to the eye, as well as being situated on the radial axis or 
close to it. 

[5] Therefore, the conditions for perceiving an object as it is are eight: 
distance, being in a certain position, luminosity, being of a sizable magnitude, 
opacity, transparency of the air, time and soundness of the eye. An 

•ii 36b object | will be distinctly perceived if it combines all of these conditions, but. 
not when it lacks some of them, even when the object is visible to the eye. 

[6] We say, then, that for any visible object there exists for each one of these 
conditions a certain range within which sight may perceive the object as it is. 
An object will be perceived as it is as long as it combines these conditions and 
provided each of them lies within the moderate range within which the object 
may be perceived as it is. If one or more of these conditions falls far outside 
that range, sight will not perceive the object as it is. Thus, an exceedingly 
remote object will not be truly perceived by sight, and, similarly, sight cannot 
achieve true perception of an object that is very close to the eye. But between 
these two limits there exist many distances at which sight can achieve a true 
and unambiguous perception of that object. Therefore, the distances at which 

i,! 37a true perception | of an object may be achieved are limited, none of them being 
too far or too near. Moreover, those distances vary with every object. Thus 
the form of a fairly large object may be truly perceived at a distance from 


252 


Optics 


which the form of a small one will be invisible or indistinct. Similarly, the 
form of a strongly luminous object may be perceived at a distance from which 
the form of a dim object will be inapparent. 

[7] Again, sight will not have a true perception of an object that does not lie 
[directly] opposite the middle of the eye but is located away and far from it in 
such a way that the radial axis neither meets nor approaches any of the object’s 
parts. Nor will sight have a true perception of an object seen with both eyes, 
when the two visual axes, or the similarly situated rays, do not meet on it, or 
when the object does not occupy the same position relative to both eyes. 
Again, no true perception will be had of an object to which the radial lines are 

1 37b excessively inclined. 1 But an object | will be truly perceived if it lies opposite 
the middle of the eye and the radial axis falls on a point in it or on one close to 
such a point, provided the object is not of wide dimensions. An object seen 
with both eyes will be truly perceived if the two visual axes or the similarly 
situated rays meet on it, and if it occupies the same position relative to both 
eyes. The form of an object frontally facing the eye, or close to the frontal 
position and only slightly oblique, will be truly perceived. But the small 
I obliquity at which sight may perceive the true form of an object will depend 

on the [visible] properties of the object. Similarly, the short distance from the 
visual axis, at which the object may be truly perceived, will depend on the 
properties of the object. Sight may thus perceive the true form of an object 
that lies outside, but at a short distance from, the radial axis, if no fine detail 
exists in it. Similarly, sight will perceive the true identity 2 of the object if the 
1 vsa latter is only slightly inclined to the radial lines. If an object | with fine detail 
lies outside the radial axis, its true form may become obscure at a distance 
from the axis, at which [distance] the true form of an object with no such detail 
will be perceptible. Similarly, the true form of that object may become 
obscure at an inclination to the radial lines, at which one can perceive the true 
form of an object without fine detail. 

[8] Again, sight will not perceive the true form of an object in which there is 
little or imperfectly visible light, especially if subtle features exist in it. 
Similarly, if the object shines with a strong light, or if it is smooth and 

I irradiated with strong light, sight will not have a true perception of it. Now 

between the faint and the radiant light there are many lights in the presence of 
which sight may acquire a true perception of the object. And these lights, in 
which objects may be truly perceived, always have a limit, none of them being 
too strong or too faint. Moreover, the light in which the form of an object 
[ 38b may be truly perceived will vary with the properties | in the object and with 
the size of the object. For sight may perceive the identity of an object that is 
devoid of fine detail in a little light in the presence of which the form of an 
object with minute features will be indistinct. Similarly, a fairly large object 


253 


III. 3 

may be perceived in the presence of a little light in which an extremely small 
object will be invisible. 

[9] Again, sight cannot truly perceive an extremely small object in which 
minute features and distinct parts exist, such as the extremely small animals in 
which the individual organs and the outlines of the face and limbs are so small 
as to fall outside the sight’s power of perception. Such animals are not truly 
perceptible, nor are their forms ascertainable, because sight can perceive their 
true forms only if their individual bodily organs are visible to it. If the anima. 
is fairly large, its organs will be of proportionate size, and sight will be able to 

in 39a perceive each of them. | When sight perceives each of the individual external 
organs, it will have perceived the animal’s form as it is. Thus sight cannot 
perceive the true forms of any objects in which extremely fine details exist. 
These objects will be truly perceived if their features are fairly large and of a 
proportionate [size]. 

[10] Again, if the object is transparent, with only a very slight opacity in it, 
sight will not achieve a true perception of it. If it is not transparent, or has a 
little transparency and manifest opacity, sight will truly perceive it. The 
lighter the colour of the transparent body, the more opacity it will require to 
be perceptible; with stronger colours, true perception will be possible in the 
presence of a little opacity which would not be sufficient for identifying an 
object with a light colour. If minute objects or objects with minute features 
exist in an atmosphere which is extremely dense and dark with mist, fog, 

111 39b smoke or the like, | sight will not truly perceive those objects. Similarly, if a 
transparent but somewhat opaque body interrupts the air between a visible 
object and the eye, sight will not have a true perception of that object. Sight 
will, however, truly perceive objects placed in a pure, thin and homogene- 
ously transparent air which is not interrupted by bodies with opacity in them. 
Similarly, if the objects existing in air of slight density are not extremely 
small, or their features are not extremely fine, sight will have a true perception 
of them, unhindered by that air despite its density. Moreover, the density of 
the air in which the object can be truly perceived will vary with the properties 
of the object; for while in air of slight density sight may perceive the true 

in 40a identity of an object lacking in fine features, | it may not be able to identify in 

the same air an object possessing such features. 

[11] Again, if an object moves with very great speed so that it covers the 
distance on which it is seen in the least amount of time, sight will not have a 
true perception of what that object is. For example, if the beholder is looking 
through an opening or door at a distance from him, while an object passes 
with great speed behind the opening or door, he will not be able to identify the 
perceived object, being unable to ascertain or truly perceive its form. Sight 
will, however, perceive what that object is and identify it if the object is kept 


255 


III 40b 


nr 41a 


11 41b 


254 Optics 

motionless in front of the eye or if it covers a not immoderate distance in a 
sensible interval of time. 

[12] Again, if the motion is circular and extremely rapid, like the [rotary] 
motion of a top, sight will not perceive it, but will perceive the moving top, if 
the motion is very rapid, as if it were | motionless. Similarly, an extremely 
slow motion is not perceptible to sight in a short interval of time; sight 
perceives a very slowly moving object as if it were stationary. 

[13] Again, if sight is impaired by some defect, or adversely affected by 
some accident, it will not be able to perceive the object truly. True perception 
will, however, be possible for it when it is sound and free from defects or 
accidental impediments. It will also be capable of true perception when the 
impediment is slight and the objects seen are not extremely small and do not 
possess fine features. 

[14] It is manifest from what we have set out and explained in detail that, for 
any visible object, there exists, for each one of the conditions under which the 
object may be perceived as it is, a certain range within which such a perception 
can be achieved, so that sight will fail to perceive the object if this range is 
considerably transcended. Now, in the case of distance, the range will be 
transcended | to the extent that no true perception of the object will be 
accomplished, either by excessive increase or excessive decrease. In the case of 
position, the range is transcended when the object is far from the radial axis, or 
when it is not similarly situated with respect to the two eyes when vision is 
acquired by both eyes (for when position differs in relation to the two eyes, the 
rays drawn from both eyes and meeting on the object will not be similarly 
situated), or when the object’s surface is excessively oblique to the radial lines, 
or when that surface, or the interval between two objects, extends along the 
radial lines. In general, any position in which the object cannot be perceived as 
it is will be one that transcends moderateness. In the case of light, [the range 
will be transcended] by excessive increase or decrease. In the case of magni- 
tude, by its being excessively small. In the case of opacity, by excessive 
transparency, and in [transparent] air, by excessive density in all or part of it. 
In the case of time, by its being excessively short. And in the case of sight, by 
its excessive weakness or impairment. 

| [15] Now that this has been made clear let us call the range within which an 
object can be perceived as it is, for each of the conditions for true perception, 
‘the range of moderateness’. Since, for each one of the conditions for veridical 
perception, there exists a range within which the object can be perceived as it 
is, so that sight will not perceive the object as it is when that condition 
transcends this range, we must now provide a definition of this range that 
separates it from what falls outside it by way of excess [or falling short]. 1 We 
say: the range of moderateness for each of the conditions for veridical 


III. 3 

perception is that within which there exists no sensible discrepancy between 
the form that sight perceives of an object and the true form of the object. This 
definition holds for each of the conditions for perceiving the object as it is. The 
extreme limit of the range 2 in the case of each of these conditions will vary 
, :i with the object; and for a given object, the range for every condition | will 
vary with each of the remaining conditions of vision, and also with the colour 
and subtle features that may exist in that object, such as outlines, designs, 
script or individually distinguishable parts. Thus, for any visible object, the 
range of moderateness for distance will depend on: the colour of the object, 
the fine detail that may exist in it, the object’s light, position, magnitude, 
opacity, the air that lies between it and the eye, time, and the soundness and 
strength of the eye. 

[16] Thus the identity of a pure white or bright-coloured object may be 
apparent from a greater distance than the maximum distance for identifying a 
dull or earth-coloured object which is the same as the first in regard to all of its 

A 2b remaining properties. | Therefore the range of distance within which a dull or 
earth-coloured object may be identified will be narrower than that within 
which a pure white or bright-coloured object is identifiable. 

[17] Again, the identity of an object in which no fine detail or delineated 
parts exist, will be visible at a larger distance than the maximum distance for 
identifying an object possessing fine detail or delineated parts. Therefore, the 
range of distance within which sight is able to identify an object with minute 
features will be narrower than that for an object in which such features do not 
exist. 

[18] Again, an object lying in front of the eye on the radial axis, or at the 
concourse of the two axes when viewed with both eyes, will be clearer than 
when it lies at a far distance from the axis or from where the two axes meet. 
The object will also be more clear when it is frontally oriented in relation to the 
eye than when it is obliquely situated, whether vision is achieved with 

M 43a both eyes | or with one eye. And the clearer object will be identifiable from a 
larger distance than the maximum distance for identifying one that is not so 
clear. Therefore the range of the distance at which sight may identify an object 
that is far from the axis or oblique to both axis and radial lines will be narrower 
than the range of distance for an object that lies opposite the eyes at the 
concourse of the two axes, and narrower than the range for a frontally 
oriented object. 

[19] Again, a strongly luminous object may be identified at a distance greater 
than the maximum distance at which sight will identify an object in which the 
light is faint. Therefore, the range in which sight may identify a dim object is 
narrower than that in which it will identify a strongly luminous object. 


2S6 


Optics 


257 


[20] Similarly, sight may identify a large object at a distance greater than the 
4.3b maximum distance j for identifying a small object. Therefore the range in 

which sight may identify an object of a small size is narrower than that in 
which an object of a large size is identifiable. 

[21] The same holds for an opaque object that has some transparency in it 
and also for one that has little transparency: sight may identify it at a distance 
greater than the maximum distance for identifying a very transparent object 
having little opacity in it. Therefore the range of distance in which sight can 
identify a transparent object with little opacity in it is narrower than that in 
which an opaque or slightly transparent object may be identified. 

[22] Again, if the object lies in pure air of extreme and continuous 
transparency, sight may identify it at a distance greater than the maximum 

44a distance at which the same object may be identified in | a dense air or in air in 
which some turbidity or other impediments exist. Therefore the range of 
distance in which an object can be identified in dense or impeded air is 
narrower than the range of distance in the case of pure and transparent air. 

[23] Again, if an object is close to the eyes, sight will identify it in a shorter 
time than that required for identifying it from a distance. Experimentation 
will show this to be invariably the case with visible objects, especially when 
they possess minute detail. That being always the case, especially in the 
presence of fine detail, and assuming the time for perceiving the object to be 
limited, the range of distance in which sight can identify the object will be 
dependent on that time. For if sight glances at an object and then immediately 
turns away from it, or if an eye in motion perceives an object which then 

4.4b immediately disappears from view as a result of this motion, or if | an object in 
motion is perceived immediately before it disappears from view as a result of 
this motion, so that the object does not remain before the eyes, then, assuming 
the time in which it is perceived to be short, sight may identify such an object 
if it is close to the eyes, though the duration of perception may be short. If, 
however, the object is far from the eyes, sight will not identify it in the very 
short interval of time in which it was identified when it was near the eyes. 
Thus if the time in which sight may identify an object is limited and short, 
then the range of distance in which the identification may be achieved in that 
amount of time will be narrower than the range of distance in which sight will 
identify the same object in a longer interval of time. Therefore the range of 
distance in which sight may identify an object in a limited and short interval of 
time during which it is able to perceive and contemplate the object is narrower 
+53 than the range of distance | related to an extended interval of time 1 during 
which the object may be perceived and truly contemplated. 

[24] And again, if sight is sound and strong and does not suffer from defects 
or impediments, it will identify an object at a distance greater than the 


III. 3 

maximum distance at which a weak, defective or impeded sight can identify 
that object. Therefore the range of distance in which a defective or impeded 
sight may identify an object is narrower than that in which a sound sight can 
identify that object. 

[25] It is therefore clear from what we have explained that the range of 
moderateness for distance varies with the conditions we have detailed. 1 

[26] Moreover, the range of moderateness for position varies with the 
object’s colour, the fine detail that may exist in it, its distance, light, 

hi 45b magnitude, opacity, the [intermediate] air, time (if it is | limited) and the 
soundness and strength of sight. 

[27] The moderate range for the light that exists in the object varies with the 
object’s colour, its minute detail, distance, position, magnitude, opacity, the 
[intermediate] air, the time in which the object is contemplated if this time is 
limited, and the soundness and strength of sight. 

[28] The moderate range for magnitude varies with the object’s colour, fine 
detail, distance, position, light, opacity, the [intermediate] air, the duration 
[of perception], and the soundness and strength of sight. 

[ 29 ] The moderate range for opacity applies, however, to transparent 
bodies that have some opacity in them. In the case of such bodies, the range of 
moderateness for opacity will vary with the colour of the object, the colour or 

m 46a light that is visible behind it, the fine detail that may exist in it, the | distance of 
the object, its position, light, magnitude, the [intermediate] air, the time in 
which sight is able to contemplate it, and the soundness and strength of sight. 

[30] The moderate range for the transparency of the air varies with the 
object’s colour, the fineness of its detail, distance, position, light, magnitude, 
opacity, time, and the soundness and strength of sight. 

[31] The moderate range for the time in which sight may identify an object 
will also vary with the object’s colour, the fineness of its detail, distance, 
position, light, magnitude, opacity, the [intermediate] air, and the soundness 
and strength of sight. 

[32] The moderate range for the soundness of sight and its freedom from 
defects or impediments will vary with the object’s colour, the fineness of its 

ui 46b detail, distance, position, light, magnitude, opacity, | the [intermediate] air 
and time. 

[33] If all conditions [of vision] are individually [examined], as was done for 
distance, it will become clear that the range of moderateness for any one of 
them varies with each of the properties or conditions 1 mentioned in connec- 
tion with [distance]. It is, therefore, evident from what we have explained and 
set forth in detail that, for each of the properties necessary for perceiving an 
object as it is, there exists, for every object, a certain range within which sight 



Optics 


259 


258 

may have true perception of that object, i.e. may perceive its form as it is; that 
when that range is considerably transcended, sight will either not perceive the 
object or perceive it to be other than it is; and that, for a given object, the range 
of each of these conditions will vary with the other properties of the object 2 
which we have detailed. Sight will perceive an object as it is if each one of the 
conditions for perceiving an object as it is lies within the range of moderate- 
ness for that object. 

[i 47a [34] That being so, if sight perceives an object to be | other than it is, then it 

will not be the case that every one of the conditions for perceiving that object 
as it is 1 lies within the moderate range; one or more of them will have 
transcended that range. From this it follows that sight does not perceive any 
object to be other than it is unless one or more of these conditions transcend 
the moderate range; for if all these conditions remain in that range with respect 
to a certain object, that object will be perceived as it is. Again, if perception of 
the object as it is cannot be achieved unless all conditions for perceiving it as it 
is fall within the moderate range for that object, then if one or more of these 
conditions transcend the range of moderateness, sight will not perceive the 
[ 47b object as it is, but will perceive it to be other than it is. If, | when one of these 
conditions transcends the range of moderateness, sight perceives the object to 
be other than it is, and if, when all these conditions are in that range, sight 
perceives the object as it is, then the reason why sight perceives the object to be 
other than it is, is that one or more of these conditions have transcended that 
range. Now for sight to err is to perceive the object to be other than it is. If that 
is so, and if the failure of sight to perceive the object as it is can only be due to 
the fact that one or more of the conditions for true perception have tran- 
scended the range of moderateness, then the reason for sight’s error must be 
that one or more of these conditions have transcended that range. The causes 
1 1 48a of all visual errors | must therefore be that the previously detailed conditions 

for perceiving objects as they are have transcended the moderate range. That is 
what we wished to make clear in this chapter. 

CHAPTER 4 

ON DISTINGUISHING ERRORS OF SIGHT 

[1] It was shown in the Second Book that there exist three modes of visual 

perception: 1 pure sensation, 2 recognition, and inference and discernment at 

the time of perceiving the object. Therefore, an error that occurs in what sight 
perceives by pure sensation will be an error in the sensation itself. And an error 
in what sight perceives by recognition will be an error of recognition. And an 
error in what sight perceives by inference and discernment at the moment of 


III. 4 

vision will be an error in inference and discernment or in the premisses on 
which | the inference and discernment are based. It was also shown in the 
Second Book that that which sight perceives by pure sensation are light qua 
light and colour qua colour. 3 

[2] As for the properties and forms that are perceived by recognition, they 
comprise all those visible objects, or kinds of objects, 1 which sight has become 
familiar with as a result of their frequent presence before it. Some of these are 
originally perceived by pure sensation; then, as they are repeatedly and 
frequently presented to the eye, sight becomes capable of recognizing them at 
the moment of perceiving them, such as the kinds of lights and colours. Thus 
sight recognizes the light of the sun as a result of having repeatedly experi- 
enced it; and it is capable of differentiating sunlight from moonlight or the 
light of a flame; originally, however, it could have perceived the light of the 
sun, or any light, only by pure sensation. Sight also recognizes familiar 
colours and discriminates them by recognition as a result of having repeatedly 
and frequently perceived them; but, as was shown in the Second Book, 
perception of every colour must have been originally acquired by pure 
sensation, because originally it must have been perception of colour qua 
:1149a colour. Other | things are originally perceived by inference and discernment, 
then, by repeated and frequent perception, sight comes to recognize them at 
the moment of perception without resuming the inference or discernment, 
but merely by means of their distinctive marks. 2 These are all the composite 
forms which sight has become familiar with and has frequently perceived, 
such as the forms of familiar animals, fruits, plants, utensils, inanimate bodies 
and other familiar objects; also, all particular properties that are perceived by 
inference, discernment and repetition in visible objects, such as familiar shapes 
(rotundity, straightness, triangularity, squareness), or smoothness, or rough- 
ness, or a certain shadow or darkness or beauty or ugliness, and similar 
particular properties that are perceptible to sight; and all universal properties 
that exist in the individuals of every species of visible objects, such as the shape 
of man or horse, or the figure 3 of tree or palm, and similar universal properties 
■1149b found in every species | of visible objects. For it has been shown that sight 
originally perceives these properties by inference and discernment; then when 
their forms are established in the soul sight comes to perceive them by 
recognition without resuming the inference or discernment at the time of 
sensation. Similarly, sight first perceives composite forms by discernment and 
inference, then, as the perception is repeated and they become familiar, it 
comes to perceive them by recognition without resuming the inference at the 
time of sensation, but merely by means of their distinctive marks. 

[3] As for the things that sight perceives by inference and discernment at the 
time of sensation, these comprise all composite forms which sight has not 


26 o 


Optics 


repeatedly and frequently perceived, and all those particular properties in 
particular individuals which we have shown to be perceptible by discernment 
and inference. 

[ 4 ] Since all that sight can perceive of visible objects falls into these three 

50a divisions, then all errors of sight fall into these three divisions, | and therefore 

the errors of sight are of three kinds: errors of pure sensation, errors of 
recognition and errors of discernment and inference. 

[5] An example of the errors of pure sensation is provided by sight’s 
perception of an object of various strong colours, such as dark blue, wine, 
purpure 1 and the like, when the object exists in a very obscure place. For sight 
will perceive such a body, when faintly illuminated, to be of a single dark 
colour, and will not ascertain its colours. If the beholder has had no prior 
knowledge of that object, he will take it to be of a single black or dark colour, 
even though the conditions for perceiving the object as it is, other than the 
light, may be within the range of moderateness. Sight will therefore have 
erred in its perception of the colour of that object. If it perceives the object to 
be of one colour, when the colours are many, and colour qua colour is 

sob perceptible only by mere | sensation, then this will be an error in pure 
sensation, the cause ofwhich is that the light in the object has fallen excessively 
short of the range of moderateness. For when such an object has been taken 
out of the obscure place to another of moderate light, while the other 
conditions for perceiving the object as it is remain within the moderate range, 
sight will perceive the various colours of the object and perceive each of them 
as it is. 

[6] An example of the errors that occur in recognition is when sight 
perceives from a large distance a person who resembles someone known and 
familiar to the beholder, say Zayd: the beholder may, from a distance, mistake 
the seen person for Zayd, even though other conditions for perceiving the 
object as it is fall within the moderate range, except for distance. Sight will 
then have erred in its perception of that individual, and this will be an error of 

51a recognition, the cause of which is | that the distance of the individual has 
exceeded the range of moderateness. For when the person comes near the eye, 
the beholder does not mistake his form for that of someone else who is known 
and familiar to him, provided the other conditions for perceiving the object as 
it is fall within the range of moderateness. 

[7] An example of the errors that may occur in inference and discernment at 
the time of perception is provided by sight’s perception of the movement of the 
moon when a thin, discontinuous cloud of variable form moves fast before the 
moon’s surface. Sight will erroneously see the moon as moving rapidly, and 
therefore commit an error in inference because movement can be perceived 


III. 4 261 

only by inference at the time of sensation; and the cause of this error will be 
that the moon’s distance has very much exceeded the range of 
.jj.jb moderateness. For) when a transparent body moves in front of objects 
placed on the ground near the eye they are not perceived to be in motion, 
provided the remaining conditions of veridical perception for these objects 
are within the range of moderateness. This may be experienced in bodies on 
the surface of the earth, namely those immersed in clear running water. For, 
observing an object immersed in clear running water, sight will not perceive 
that object to be in motion, though it perceives the moon as moving behind 
a cloud. 

[8] The inference on account of which this error occurs involves correlating 
the moon with parts of the cloud. As the cloud moves, different parts of it will 
be successively in line with the moon, the edges of some of the cloud’s 
discontinous parts moving away from the moon while others draw near to it. 

\[[ 52a As the eye looks at the moon behind the cloud, while the cloud | swiftly 
moves, the moon will be seen in line with the variously formed parts of the 
cloud one by one. If the parts of the cloud are similar, then by correlating the 
moon with the edges of these patches one after another, sight will perceive the 
moon as it approaches the extremity of one part and recedes from that of the 
other, or as it passes into one part and out of another; and from the varying 
position of the moon relative to sections of the cloud will take the moon to be 
in motion. That is the way in which sight normally perceives moving bodies 
on the surface of the earth. For it perceives the moving body in line with 
successive parts of the ground-surface on which it moves, getting farther from 
one part and nearer to another. Sight therefore perceives the moon as moving 
ill 52b behind the swiftly moving cloud because it correlates a part of | the moon with 
successive parts of the cloud. The reason why sight takes this succession to be 
due to the moon’s motion, not the cloud’s, is the following: when the cloud 
covers the sky or a section of it, its motion will not be immediately 
perceptible; rather, as sight glances at the cloud in this case it will immediately 
take it to be stationary. It will only perceive the motion of the cloud if, 
observing the extremity or part of the cloud, it correlates it with a fixed object 
on the surface of the ground, or with the eye itself, and contemplates it for a 
while. If, after a sensible interval of time, the cloud is found to have changed 
position, sight will perceive its motion, but such motion will not appear by 
glancing at the cloud. If the cloud appears motionless and the moon is found to 
come in line with one part of it after another, then sight will judge the moon to 
Hi 53a be in motion. This | error is due solely to excessive distance, for no such error 
occurs with objects of this description when they are near the eye. 

[9] These, then, are examples of how errors occur in these three ways; all 
errors of sight fall into these three categories. 1 


262 


Optics 


CHAPTER 5 

ON THE WAYS IN WHICH SIGHT ERRS IN PURE 
SENSATION 

[i] It has been shown that what sight perceives by pure sensation 1 are light 
qua light and colour qua colour. Since these are the only properties that sight 
perceives by pure sensation, errors in pure sensation can occur only in regard 
to them. Now errors in [perceiving] light qua light can occur only in regard to 
the light’s strength and weakness, for that which sight perceives of light qua 
ii 53b light is nothing but luminosity. As for colour qua | colour, it was shown in the 
Second Book that sight perceives of it a coloration which resembles darkness 
or shadow. Now in the case of darkness or shadow and their likes error can 
occur only in regard to their degree of strength or weakness. That being so, 
error in colour qua colour, in the case of an object of a single colour, can occur 
only in regard to strength and weakness [of that colour]. In the case of an 
object of various colours which are all strong and closely similar, or all 
delicate 2 and closely similar, sight will perceive them all as a single colour. 
Because if they are strong, sight will perceive of all of them a certain darkness, 
and, if they are closely similar in strength, it will perceive of all of them a 
similar darkness, and, therefore take them all to be a single colour. If, 
however, they are all delicate, sight will perceive of all of them a certain 
shadow only, and since, moreover, they are closely similar in delicateness, 
sight will perceive of all of them a similar shadow, and, therefore, take them to 
be a single colour. 

11 54a [2] If, however, the object has various colours, of which some are strong | 

and some delicate, sight will perceive them as contiguous darkness and 
shadow, and, therefore, perceive the object as being of two, not many, 
colours. Error in pure sensation may thus occur also in regard to difference or 
similarity of colours in a multi-coloured object. It may also happen that the 
colours of a multi-coloured object are perceived as a single colour when the 
variously coloured parts are too small to be individually perceptible to the eye. 
In this case sight will be unable to discern their colours and thus perceive the 
object as being all of one colour, if the parts of the object whose colours differ 
from the colour of the object as a whole are extremely small. If some of these 
parts are small and some large, sight will perceive the whole object as 
variously coloured by virtue of the difference between the large parts. Error in 
pure sensation may thus occur also in regard to difference of colours on 
account of the smallness of parts. These are the only properties in regard to 
11 54b which | error in pure sensation may occur. 

[ 3 ] Therefore, error in pure sensation occurs only in [the perception of] 
light qua light and of colour qua colour. In the case of light qua light error 


III. 5 263 

occurs only in regard to difference in the degree of the light’s strength and 
weakness, and in the case of colour qua colour only in regard to difference in 
the degree of the colour’s strength and weakness. In the case of a variously 
coloured object, sight may err in regard to the difference between the object’s 
colours or their number. But error in regard to what the colour is 1 is an error 
in recognition, as was shown in the Second Book, and the same is true of 
[error in regard to] what the light is. 1 Sight may therefore err in pure sensation 
only in the ways we have described. 

[4] We now describe how visual errors in pure sensation depend on each of 
the causes we have set forth in detail. Sight may err in pure sensation because 
the object’s distance [from the eye] falls outside the moderate range. For 

; <u example, when the object is fairly large and multi-coloured, and every one of | 
the object’s parts possessing these colours is small, and the object is at a very 
large distance, sight will perceive it as being of a single indeterminate colour. 1 
By testing a variously coloured object from a very large distance the experi- 
menter will find it to be as we have described it. 

[5] The reason is [as follows]: The small parts of an object will not be 
individually visible at a very long distance that exceeds the moderate range 
with respect to the object as a whole. For let the variously coloured object be 
placed at a disproportionately large distance with respect to the object as a 
whole; let the magnitude of each of the variously coloured parts, or that of any 
equal object, be invisible from that distance on account of their smallness in 
relation to that distance, while the object as a whole remains visible because it 
is large enough as a whole in relation to that distance; then sight will perceive 
the object as a whole at that very large distance from which the object’s small 
parts become individually invisible, though sight will neither perceive the 

•I 55b true form of the object | in detail, nor any of the individual parts, provided that 

the distance is not so excessively large as to make the object as a whole 
invisible. Now sight invariably perceives an object as a whole, if at all, as 
being coloured; but it will not discern the different colours of the object’s parts 
if these parts are not individually perceptible to it; therefore sight will perceive 
the object as being of a single indeterminate colour if it perceives the object as a 
whole as coloured without discerning the variety of colours in it. 

[6] Therefore, if a variously coloured object whose variously coloured parts 
are small is placed at a very large distance from which the individual parts and 
the true form of the object, but not the object as a whole, are invisible, sight 
will perceive that object as being of one colour, not many, and thus will err in 
what it perceives of the object’s colour. Since colour is perceived by pure 
sensation, this will be an error in pure sensation. The cause of this error will 


18 


Optics 


! 

264 

1 56a be | that the object is at a distance exceeding the moderate range. For the 
variously coloured parts of such an object will be individually perceptible 
from a moderate distance, the viewing eye being able to perceive each of these 
parts and their colours as they are, assuming that the remaining conditions for 
perceiving the object as it is are within the moderate range. It is in some such 
way that the error of sight in pure sensation may depend on the object’s being 
at a distance in excess of the moderate range. 

[7] Sight may err in pure sensation because the position of the object falls 
outside the moderate range. This happens, for example, in the case of an 
object of various colours, such as dark blue, wine, misanm-g reen, 1 and the 
like, among which no light colours 2 exist but all are strong and saturated 3 and 
156b closely similar. | For assume that the object is displaced too far from the 
position directly opposite the middle of the eye and far from the radial axis, 
and that the eye is looking at another object on which it fixes its gaze; assume, 
further, that the visual axis (or both visual axes, if vision is achieved by both 
eyes) meets the object gazed at while the eye (or eyes) perceives the variously 
coloured object located to one side from the middle of the eye and away from 
I the visual axis; then sight will perceive the object that has such a position as 

' being of one colour. The reason for this was shown in the first chapter of this 

Book: namely that if the object is displaced too far from the visual axis, its 
form will be uncertain 4 and indistinct, and the parts of it will be indiscernible. 
If a test is made of a variously coloured object in which the colours are as we 
E 57a described in the first chapter, the object being placed outside the radial axis | 

and very far from it, the experimenter will find the object to be such as we 
described it, namely that it is of a single uncertain 4 colour. Sight will therefore 
err in what it perceives of the colour of this object. And since colour is 
perceived by pure sensation, this will be an error in pure sensation; and the 
cause of this error will be that the position of the object falls outside the 
moderate range. For, in the case of such a variously coloured object as we have 
defined, if the eye moves in such a way that the radial axis passes over every 
point of the object, sight will perceive each of the various colours as it is, 
provided that the other conditions required for perceiving the object as it is are 
within the range of moderateness. It is in some such way that the error of sight 
in pure sensation may be due to the object’s position being outside the range of 
moderateness. 

57b [8] Sight errs in pure sensation when | the light in the seen object falls outside 

the moderate range: this happens, for example, when, again, a variously 
coloured object in which the colours are strong and closely similar is viewed in 
the light of a small flame. Sight will perceive such an object as being of a single 
dark colour. For strong colours appear dark in a faint light, and every colour in 
the variously coloured object we have described will look dark; the beholder 


III. 5 265 

will take it to be of a single dark colour if he has no prior knowledge of its 
colours . Sight will therefore err in what it perceives of the colour of the object; 
and this will be an error in pure sensation of which the cause is that the light in 
the object falls outside the moderate range. For sight can perceive the colours 
of such an object as they are in the presence of a strong light, provided other 

m 5 sa conditions | for perceiving the object as it is fall within the range of moderate- 
ness. It is in some such way that sight errs in pure sensation when light falls 
outside the range of moderateness. 

[9] Sight also errs in pure sensation when the object’s magnitude falls outside 
the moderate range; this happens, for example, in the case of an object that has 
variously coloured pores, incisions or points whose colours differ from that of 
the whole object, assuming that all these are too small to be perceptible and 
that a single colour spreads over the object as a whole. Sight will perceive of 
such an object only the dominant colour, but not the pores or incisions in it or 
their colours if they are too small to be seen. It will perceive such an object as 
being of a single colour, namely that covering the whole object, though 

eii 5 sb various colours exist in the object. | Sight will therefore err in its perception of 
the colour of that object, and this will be an error in pure sensation. The cause 
of this error will be that the magnitude of the variously coloured parts falls 
outside the moderate range. For when those points and pores are larger sight 
will perceive them together with their colours and identify all colours in the 
object of which these are parts, provided other conditions for perceiving the 
object as it is lie within the moderate range. It is in some such way that sight 
errs in pure sensation when the magnitude falls outside the moderate range. 

[10] Sight errs in pure sensation when the opacity of the object falls outside 
the moderate range: this happens, for example, in the case of an extremely 
transparent object in which only a little opacity exists, such as clear and pure 
crystal or glass that is pure white and thin, if behind these bodies and adhering 

in 59a to them there exists | another body with various strong colours, assuming that 
sight perceives that object and the colours behind it without the knowledge 
that they lie behind the object and in the absence of a sign 1 that draws the eye’s 
attention to their belonging to another body lying behind that body. Sight 
will perceive such a transparent and pure white body as coloured by those 
colours that appear behind it, and will neither sense its whiteness and the 
purity of its colour nor acquire the knowledge that it has a single colour. If, on 
the other hand, sight perceives a transparent or white object as being of 
various colours, then it will have erred in regard to the object’s colour. This 
will be an error in pure sensation, the cause of it being that the object’s opacity 
has fallen outside the moderate range. For sight is able to perceive an object of 
much opacity or little transparency together with its colour, even if there 
exists behind it another body with stronger colours. The [inherent] colour of 


2 66 


Optics 


III. 6 


II 59b 


II 6oa 


II fob 


that object will not be inapparent despite the object’s slight transparency, [ 
and, therefore, sight will not perceive the object as variously coloured if other 
conditions for perceiving the object as it is fall within the moderate range. It is 
in some such way that sight errs when the object’s opacity falls outside the 
moderate range. 

[I i] Sight errs in pure sensation when the transparency of the air falls outside 
the moderate range: this happens, for example, when the sight perceives the 
object in thick smoke. For when sight perceives an object in smoke, it 
perceives the object’s colour mixed with that of the smoke; if the object is of a 
light colour, sight will perceive its colour to be dark, especially when the eye is 
outside the smoke. But if sight perceives the object’s colour as dark when it is 
light, then it will have erred in regard to colour, and this will be an error in 
pure sensation, the cause of which is that the transparency of the air has fallen 
outside the moderate range. For when the air is pure and of clear transparency, 
sight will truly perceive the colours of objects existing in it, if other condi- 
tions | for perceiving these objects as they are fall within the moderate range. 

[12] Sight errs in pure sensation when the duration [of perception] falls 
outside the range of moderateness. This happens, for example, when a 
variously coloured object exists in an obscure but not very dark place and the 
colours are strong and closely similar. Glancing briefly at such an object and 
then immediately turning away from it, sight will take it to be of a single 
colour and will not sense its various colours at the moment of glancing at it, 
provided the light in that place is faint. If, however, the eye remains fixed 
before such an object for an extended interval of time, 1 sight will perceive the 
various colours provided the place is not too dark. Now if sight perceives a 
variously coloured object as being of one colour it will have erred in regard to 
the object’s colour, and this will be an error in pure sensation of which the 
cause will be that the time during which the object is perceived has fallen 
outside the range of moderateness. For | when the eye remains fixed before an 
object having such various colours for a while, sight will perceive the various 
colours if other conditions for perceiving the object as it is fall within the 
moderate range. It is in some such manner, then, that sight errs in pure sensation 
when the time for perceiving the object falls outside the range of moderateness. 

[13] The reason why sight does not discriminate between the various 
colours of an object lying in an obscure place when the object is regarded for a 
very short time, is that a very faint light does not have an effect on the eye 
when the form [of that light] occurs in it. Faint light can produce a sensible 
effect in the eye only after a fairly long interval of time, for faint light has little 
strength and is of little effect. If sight can sense faint light only after an 
extended interval of time, then it can sense the colour mixed with that light 
only after an extended interval of time. 


267 

. IAIJ [14] Sight errs in pure sensation when [the condition of] | sight itself falls 

outside the moderate range. This happens, for example, when the eye looks at 
a strong light for some length of time, then turns to look at a white or 
light-coloured object lying in the shadow or in a moderate light: sight will 
perceive the colour of that object to be dark. For if the eye looks at length at a 
strong light, the light will dim its sight, thus producing a certain darkness that 
lingers in the eye for a while before it clears up. Looking under the influence of 
the light at a white or light-coloured object, sight will find it dark. Now if 
sight perceives a white or light-coloured object as dark, then it will have erred 
regarding its colour, and this will be an error in pure sensation of which the 
cause will be that sight itself has fallen outside the range of moderateness. For 
when sight is free from defects and no impediment has occurred that corrupts 
its form, it will perceive the visible objects as they are, provided other 
conditions for perceiving the objects as they are fall within the moderate 
range. Again, if the eye suffers from an illness that dims its sight, it will 
;u 61b perceive | the colours of objects as dark and turbid, i.e. as other than they are, 
and, therefore, will mistake the colours of these objects. The cause ot this 
error will be that the [condition of] the sight itself has fallen outside the range 
of moderateness. It is in some such manner, then, that sight errs in pure 
sensation when the eye itself has fallen outside the moderate range because of 
illness. 

[15] It is now clear from all the examples we have explained how the errors 
of sight in pure sensation depend on each of the causes of visual error. 


CHAPTER 6 

ON THE WAYS IN WHICH SIGHT ERRS IN RECOGNITION 

[1] It was shown in the Second Book that perception of what the visible 
objects are 1 can be achieved only by recognition, since perceiving what an 
object is 2 can only result from likening the form of the object to that of similar 
iI! objects known to the sight. And to liken a form | to similar ones known to the 

sight is to recognize the [object’s] species. 3 It was also shown that recognition 
of an individual results only from likening the form perceived by sight at the 
moment of recognizing that individual to a previously perceived and remem- 
bered form of the individual. That being so, sight’s error in regard to what an 
object is is an error in recognizing the object’s species. Again, when sight 
assimilates an individual to one previously known, and takes it to be that same 
individual, without this being the case, then it will have made an error in 
recognition. And to err in assimilating the form of an individual to that of 


268 


Optics 


III. 6 


another particular individual is an error in regard to individuality. All 
recognition is recognition of an individual or of a species or of the two 
combined. 

[2] Sight is accustomed to liken the forms of perceived objects, upon 
glancing at them, to similar forms of objects it has known and frequently 

62b beheld; it is also accustomed to liken the properties | in an object to similar 
properties; by this means it recognizes the object’s individuality, or species, or 
both, and the properties in the object. It is in this manner that sight recognizes 
all visible objects and all properties perceptible to the sense of sight. 

[3] When sight doubts what a perceived object or property is, thus failing to 
recognize them at the moment of glancing at them, it likens them to those 
things most similar to them among what it has known and is familiar with. 
And it is natural to the sense-faculty to assimilate what it presently perceives to 
what it has previously perceived, this being found to be so with all the senses. 
Thus from likening perceived objects to similar known ones, and owing to its 
natural disposition [to perform comparisons], sight may err in recognizing a 
visible object when its perception of the object is not perfectly correct. No 

1 63a error of recognition occurs when sight has a correct perception of the object. | 
And sight only fails to achieve a true perception of an object if one or more of 
the conditions for perceiving the object as it is fall outside the range of 
moderateness. 

[4] As for how sight errs in recognition when the distance of the object [from 
the eye] falls outside the moderate range, this happens, for example, when 
sight, upon perceiving an individual object from an exceedingly large dis- 
tance, takes it to be the same as another known individual to which it 
assimilates that object, thus committing an error in perception which is an 
error of recognition. For if it assimilates the [perceived] individual to another 
it has known and takes the two to be the same, then it will believe it has 
recognized the [perceived] individual. Since they are not the same, this will be 
an error in recognition, the cause of it being that the distance of the object has 
exceeded the moderate range. For when that same individual is close to and at 
a moderate distance from the eye, sight will have a true perception of it and 

63 b will not mistake its form | for that of another object, provided the other 

conditions for perceiving the object as it is fall within the moderate range. 

[5] This kind of error frequently occurs in sight. Thus upon seeing a man 
from a distance sight may assimilate him to another man known to it. 
Similarly, upon perceiving a horse, or mule, or ass, or ox, or a tree, or fruit or 
plant, or stone, or cloth, or one of the vessels used by men, or a certain utensil, 
provided they are seen from a large distance, sight may liken them to other 
similar things which it previously perceived and which it knows and 
remembers. 


269 

[6] Again, sight may err in perceiving the species of an object from a large 
distance. Thus when a horse is seen from afar sight may take it to be an ass, 
because it sees it from the large distance as smaller than its true size; or it may 
take it to be a particular ass which it has been accustomed to see at that place; 

m 64a and thus it may err | both in regard to the horse’s specific nature and 
individuality. Or it may see an ass from a distance and take it to be a horse, 
believing it to be small because it is distant. Or it may see a mule and take it to 
be a horse. Or it may see an ox and take it to be an ass. Or it may see a goat and 
take it to be a dog. Similarly, sight may see a tree from a distance and take it to 
be a shrub 1 because it looks small from a distance. Or it may see a shrub and 
take it to be a tree, believing it to be small because it is distant. Or it may see a 
fruit and assimilate it to other fruits. Or it may see a plant and assimilate it to 
other plants. Errors of this kind are many, and all are errors of recognition 
because sight assimilates such things to what it knows, taking them to be the 
known things themselves or to be things of the same species as these, though 
this is not the case. The cause of all errors of this kind is that the distance has 
exceeded the moderate range; for when sight perceives any object from a 

11164b moderate distance, it does not fail to identify | the object’s form, if other 
conditions for perceiving the object as it is fall within the moderate range. 
These are the recognized errors into which sight usually falls. 

[7] Sight may also err in recognizing unfamiliar objects 1 because their 
distance falls outside the moderate range. For example, seeing a fire on top of a 
mountain or high ground from an exceedingly far distance in the darkness of 
night, and assuming that the beholder has no prior knowledge of the existence 
of the fire in that place, and that the flame appears small from that distance, he 
may take such a fire to be a star in the sky, not a flame on the earth, and thus err 
with regard to what it is. But to err with regard to what an object is is an error 
of recognition, since the quiddity of an object can be perceived only by 
recognition. The cause of this error must be that the distance of the fire 

in 65a exceeds the moderate range; for the same fire will | undoubtedly appear as fire 
when it is near the sight, and will never be taken for a star in the sky. It is in 
some such manner that sight errs in recognition when distance falls outside the 
moderate range. 

[ 8 ] Sight may err in recognition when the position of the object falls outside 
the range of moderateness. This happens, for example, when sight perceives 
an object that lies far outside the radial axis while gazing at another object 
placed on the axis opposite the middle of the eye: sight will not have a true 
perception of such an object, and so may err with regard to what the object is. 
Thus if that object is a man sight may immediately assimilate him to another 
man known to it and believe them to be the same. Similarly, if it sees a horse, it 


270 


Optics 


III. 6 


271 


II 65b may assimilate it to ) another particular horse known to it. Again, in a similar 
manner, sight may see a horse which it believes to be an ass, or an ass which it 
believes to be a horse, if they are exceedingly far from the radial axis. 
Similarly, sight may see a tree, or fruit, or plant, or cloth, or vessel which it 
likens to other things that share some of their properties with them, some- 
times being right, sometimes wrong. For the object will not be clear when it 
lies excessively far from the visual axis, and in this case sight will not ascertain 
the object’s form; and if sight fails to ascertain the form of an object 1 while 
likening it to something which resembles it in respect of some of its perceived 
properties, then sight may err in this assimilation. 

[9] The error sight makes in this way is an error in recognition, the cause of 
which is that the position of the object has fallen outside the moderate range. 
For when the object which sight fails to recognize in this manner lies on the 
visual axis [directly] opposite the middle of the eye, and other conditions for 

11 66a perceiving the object as it is fall within the moderate range, | sight will truly 
perceive it and will not mistake its form. 1 

[10] Again, if sight perceives an object that lies on or outside the radial axis, 
so that the axis or the radial lines reaching the object are excessively inclined to 
its surface, and assuming that minute designs or fine detail exist in the object, 
sight will not perceive those fine designs or detail but rather perceive the object 
plain. For when the object is excessively inclined to the radial lines, its form 
will be indistinct and unclear, as was shown in a preceding chapter of this 
Book. 1 And if the form is unclear then the fine details that exist in it will not be 
visible — this was shown by experiment. But if sight perceives the object 
plain, it will liken it to similar plain objects in which no designs or fine detail 

1 66 b exist but which resemble that object in colour, shape, | figure or size, or in all 
of these, and will therefore err in its perception. This will be an error of 
recognition because sight will have likened the object to objects known to it, 
believing [wrongly] that it has recognized the object. And this will be an error 
' in regard to the object’s species. The cause of this error is that the object’s 

position has fallen outside the moderate range. For when an object of this 
description frontally faces the eye, and other conditions for perceiving the 
object as it is all fall within the moderate range, sight perceives the object’s fine 
detail and thus acquires a true perception of the object and does not err in 
recognizing it. It is in some such manner, then, that sight may err in 
recognition when the position of the object falls outside the moderate range. 

[11] Sight errs in recognition when the light in the seen object falls outside 
the moderate range. This happens, for example, when sight perceives an 
individual in the faint light of dawn or in an obscure place so that it fails to 
ascertain the individual’s form. If the individual is a man and the beholder is 


accustomed to see a particular person in that place, he | may take the seen 
individual to be that particular person, without this being so. Or, if he does 
not immediately ascertain the form of this individual on account of the faint 
light, he may assimilate the form itself to another man whom he knows. 
Similarly, if he sees in the dark place an animal other than man, such as a horse 
or ass or another familiar animal, he may assimilate it to a similar but not 
identical animal which he has been accustomed to see in that place. Or he may 
assimilate the form itself to another animal which is not identical with the seen 
animal. Or he may assimilate the animal he perceives in the dark place to other 
animals of a different but closely similar species. This kind of visual error 
frequently occurs when the object is seen in the faint light of dawn or in the 

: i[ 67 b darkness of night, i.e. where no | strong light exists. This is an error in 
recognition, because if sight perceives an object of this description and, 
likening it to similar individuals which it has known either individually or as a 
species, it believes it has recognized the object, then it will have erred in regard 
to the object’s individuality or species, and this will be an error in recognition. 
The cause of this error will be that the light in the object has fallen outside the 
range of moderateness. For no error occurs when the object whose form is not 
ascertained in the obscure place is perceived in a strong light, provided other 
conditions for perceiving the object as it is fall within the moderate range. 

[12] Again, when the creature called firefly, namely that which flies at night 
and appears in the darkness of night as a flashing light, is perceived in daylight, 
sight does not see in it anything of the fire which appears at night. Similarly, 
the shells and scales possessed by some marine animals, and which appear like 

ill 68a fire in the dark, show nothing of this fieriness when they are seen in daylight. | 
Now that creature resembles the moth that flies round lamps at night. Sight 
may therefore assimilate that creature to the moth which is not identical to it. . 
And, similarly, it may liken the shells it perceives in daylight to similar but 
non-luminous ones. 

[13] But for sight to perceive a luminous body as non-luminous, or to 
assimilate it to other, non-luminous objects, is an error in regard to what the 
object is. Such an error is an error of recognition. The cause of this error is that 
the light in these objects, when perceived in daylight, falls outside the 
moderate range as a result of the presence of excessive light with regard to 
these objects. For these objects appear luminous, like fire, when seen in the 
darkness of night or in places where there exists only the little light that 
appears on the surface of the ground at night. The moderate light by means of 

•ii 68b which these objects are perceived] is that only which exists in them. An 

additional small amount of light which does not affect their own light will be 
like the light seen at night on the surface of the ground; but if the additional light 
appreciably increases, the light in these objects will go beyond the moderate 


272 


Optics 


III. 6 


273 


I 


range within which their fieriness can be perceived as it is; their own light will 
not be visible because of the excessiveness of the light that radiates upon them. It 
is in these ways which we have explained, and in similar ones, that sight errs in 
recognition when the light in the object falls outside the range of moderateness. 

[14] Sight errs in recognition when the size of the object falls outside the 
moderate range. This happens, for example, in the case of extremely small 
objects in which fine detail, distinct parts and very fine lines exist, and when 
sight fails to perceive the fine detail or distinct parts or fine lines because of 
their smallness or fineness, or can perceive only some of them, or cannot 

69a perceive their figures, while perceiving | the whole object despite its smallness 
because it is broader 1 than any of its parts. Upon perceiving such objects sight 
may fail to ascertain their forms and therefore may err with regard to their 
identity. Thus when sight perceives an extremely small animal it may take it 
to be another, similar animal. For example, seeing an ant on a wall or fruit or 
grain it may take it to be a woodworm, or it may take the woodworm it sees 
on a wall to be an ant, or may take a seen flea to be a woodworm or ant if the 
flea does not immediately jump and remains motionless, 2 or it may take a 
black gnat for an ant if it sees the gnat falling rather than flying. Again, 
perceiving a small grain such as a mustard or grass seed or the like, sight may 
believe it to be of another similar species. Such objects are many and sight 
frequently errs in perceiving them. 

69b | [15] Now if sight takes the animal or seed it perceives for another [kind of] 

animal or seed, then it will have erred in perceiving it; and this will be an error 
in recognition because error in regard to what the species of an object is is an 
error of recognition. The cause of this kind of error is that the size of the object 
has fallen outside the moderate range. For sight does not err in regard to an 
object’s quiddity if other conditions for perceiving that object as it is fall 
within the moderate range. It is in these and similar manners that sight errs in 
recognition when the size of the object falls outside the range of moderateness. 

[16] Sight errs in recognition when the opacity of the seen object falls outside 
the moderate range. This happens, for example, in the case of a very 

70a transparent object | whose colour is also delicate and clear, when there exists 
behind it and adjacent to it a body with a strong and bright colour which is 
different in kind 1 from that of the transparent body. For upon perceiving such 
a transparent body sight will perceive the colour that appears behind it and 
believe that colour to belong to the transparent body, provided that sight has 
no prior knowledge of the colour of that body. 

[17] But if sight perceives an object as having a colour other than its own, 
then it will have erred in regard to the quiddity of the object’s colour; and since 


the quiddity of a colour can be perceived only by recognition, the error of 
sight in this case will be an error of recognition, the cause of it being that the 
object’s opacity has fallen outside the moderate range. For when the object is 
opaque, or if much opacity exists in it together with a little transparency, sight 
will not make an error in regard to what its colour is, provided all other 
in 70b conditions | for perceiving the object as it is fall within the moderate range. It is 
in some such way that sight errs in recognition when the object’s opacity falls 
outside the moderate range. 

[18] Sight may err in recognition for the reason that the transparency of the 
air between the eye and the object falls outside the moderate range. This 
happens, for example, in the case of an object perceived from behind a 
transparent body which interrupts the intermediate air, when the colour of 
that object is delicate and the intervening transparent body has a strong 
colour, such as a strong-coloured cloth which is thin and transparent. For 
sight will perceive the colour of such an object from behind the transparent 
body mixed with that of the transparent body, and, therefore, will perceive 
that object’s colour to be other than it is. Thus, if the object is yellow 1 and the 
intervening body is dark blue, sight will perceive the colour of that object to 

in 71a be green; if the object is white, and the colour of the intervening body | is dark 
blue, the object’s colour will appear to be blue. 2 In general, the colour of such 
an object will appear to resemble a mixture of itself with the colour of the 
intervening [transparent] body. 

[19] Now if sight perceives the colour of an object to be other than it is, 
then it will have erred in regard to the quiddity of the object’s colour; and 
error in regard to what the colour is is an error in recognition, the cause of 
which being that the air between the eye and the object has fallen outside the 
moderate range. For upon perceiving that object when the continuity of the 
intervening transparent air is uninterrupted by any transparent and coloured 
body that has some opacity in it, sight will perceive the colour of that object 
as it is if all other conditions for perceiving the object as it is lie within the 
moderate range. 

[20] [The following doubt may arise:] why should the colour of the body 
that is placed behind the transparent cloth appear mixed with the colour of the 
cloth, given that the cloth consists of opaque threads which are packed 
together, and that whatever appears behind the cloth does so only because the 

W 71b spaces between | those threads are penetrable and because the threads are thin? 

Therefore, the colour of that body which is perceptible behind the cloth 
should have appeared as small and separate parts corresponding to those 
spaces, with the colour of the threads interspersed between them. But if sight 
were to perceive the coloured body and the transparent cloth in this manner, it 


274 


Optics 


would have perceived each of the two colours as it is, distinctly and unmixed. 
This, however, is not found to be so. 

[21] In answer to this doubt we say: the threads of a transparent cloth that 
shows what lies behind it must be thin, and the gaps within it must be 
penetrable. If sight looks at a cloth whose threads are thin, then the form of 
that part of a thread next to one of the gaps will occur in an extremely small 
part of the eye, and the form that passes through that gap will also occur in an 

1 72a extremely small part of the eye that joins the part | in which the form of that 
part of the thread occurs. Therefore the colour of that part of the thread and 
the colour of that coloured body that went through the gap will occur in two 
parts of the eye whose total [magnitude] will be like a point to the sense. But if 
the sum of two contiguous parts is like a point, then they will not be 
discernible to the sense; the sentient 1 will perceive two such colours through 
an extremely small part of the eye which is indivisible to the sense. That being 
so, the sentient will perceive those two colours through a single and indivis- 
ible part of the eye. But if the sentient perceives two colours through a single 
and indivisible part of the eye, then it will perceive the two colours as mixed; 
for two colours can be perceived by the sentient as mixed only if it perceives 
them together through a single part of the eye. For this reason, then, sight will 
perceive the colour of the body that lies behind the transparent cloth as mixed 
with the colour of the cloth. That is the reason why sight perceives a variously 
coloured object in an uninterrupted air as being of one colour when the object 

1 72b is excessively | distant in relation to each of the variously coloured parts, as we 
stated in the preceding chapter. 

[22] The transparent cloth may be such that the threads of it are somewhat 
dense and the gaps in it somewhat wide, so that sight will perceive threads and 
gaps in that cloth as separate while also perceiving the colour of the body that 
is visible behind it as mixed with its colour. But the colour of a body perceived 
in this manner will not be thoroughly mixed with the colour of the cloth; it 
will be less mixed with the colour of the cloth than in the case of the colour 
mixed with a transparent cloth whose threads and gaps are extremely minute. 
However, the colour of the body which is seen behind a cloth of fairly large 
threads and gaps will [also] be mingled with the colour of the cloth, because 

173a these threads have a fine nap which spreads across the gaps in the cloth, | so 
that the [penetrable] spaces between parts of the nap are extremely small. 
Therefore, when the form of the colour of that body passes through those 
gaps it will contain within it the colour of that nap. Thus the parts of the eye in 
which the colour of that nap occurs will be extremely small; and the colour of 
the form that passes through that nap will be contained within those small 
parts of the eye; and for this reason the colour of the body that lies behind such 
a cloth will appear somewhat mixed with the colour of the cloth. A similar nap 


III. 6 


275 


also exists in a cloth made up of fine threads. In the case of such a cloth, 
therefore, [two things] are combined: smallness of the parts [of the eye] in 
which the colour of the threads occurs, and smallness of the parts in which the 
colour of that nap occurs. Consequently, sight will fail to discern those parts. 
Sight will therefore perceive the colour of the body that lies behind this cloth 
as mixed with the colour of the cloth, but without discerning the threads in the 
cloth on account of their smallness. Consequently, the colour of this cloth will 
be more thoroughly mixed with the colour of the body that appears behind it 
; i -;b than in the case of a cloth | with sizable threads and gaps. 

[23] Again, with regard to the images that appear behind the curtain, these 
images being figures moved by the illusionist in such a way that their shadows 
appear on the wall behind the curtain and on the curtain itself, sight will 
perceive those shadows behind the curtain and take them to be moving bodies 
or animals, provided that the viewer had no prior knowledge of their being 
shadows or does not at the same time perceive the hgures moved by the 
illusionist, whose shadows they are. 1 

[24] Now for sight to take the shadows it perceives for animals or objects is 
an error in regard to what these animals and objects are; and error in regard to 
the quiddity of an object is an error of recognition, the cause ot which is that 
the transparency of the air between the eye and those objects has fallen outside 
the moderate range. For if the curtain that interrupts the air between the eye 
and those figures 1 were removed, sight would perceive those shadows as 
shadows; it would not believe them to be [real] figures or animals, and 

:1174a therefore would not err in regard to their quiddity, | provided other condi- 
tions for achieving perception of the objects as they are fall within the 
moderate range. It is therefore in these and similar manners that sight errs in 
recognition when the transparency of the air falls outside the moderate range. 

[25] Sight may err in recognition for the reason that the time in which it 
perceives the object falls outside the moderate range. This happens, for 
example, in the case of an object perceived through a door, opening or hole 
behind which the object passes, so that the object is perceived only as it passes 
across that door or opening before it disappears from view, in which case the 
time for perceiving the object will be limited. For, if the object is moving 
quickly, then the time it takes to cover that interval through which it can be 

111 74b seen is limited and short, and the sight may not be able during that | time to 
contemplate the object thoroughly. And if it cannot contemplate the object 
thoroughly, then it may fail to acquire a clear and true perception of the 
object’s form. Thus if the moving object is a man, sight may liken him to 
another man whom it knows, and believe it to be that same man. Or if the 
object is an animal sight may liken it to a similar but not identical animal. Or if 



276 


Optics 


277 


the passing object is neither man nor animal, such as a cloth or vessel or a plant 
or fruit, sight may liken it to something else which is not identical with it. 
Again if the eye is moving and, while in motion, glances at an object which it 
passes without being able to contemplate it because of the rapidity of its own 
motion, then it may liken that object to another and believe it to be the same as 
that other without this being the case. 

[26] But for sight to liken a seen object to a similar object and believe it to be 
that similar object itself, without this being the case, will be an error in 
perceiving that object, | and this will be an error in recognition. For if it likens 
the object to another object not identical with it, then it will have erred either 
in regard to the object’s individuality or species; and the cause of this error will 
be that the time of perceiving that object has fallen outside the moderate range 
by being too short. For when that object is perceived for a time long enough to 
allow the sight to contemplate it, no error with regard to what that object is 
occurs, provided all other conditions for perceiving that object as it is fall 
within the moderate range. It is in these and similar ways that sight errs in 
recognition when the time of perceiving the object falls outside the moderate 
range. 

[27] Sight may err in recognition for the reason that the [condition] of the eye 
itself has fallen outside the moderate range. This happens, for example, when 
the eye looks for some length of time at a green meadow which is irradiated 
with sunlight, or at a bright-coloured body such as purple, purpure, j 
£<2 W-red, or the like, 1 on which the sun shines, and then turns to some white 
objects placed in the shadow or in moderate light. It will perceive these objects 
to be green if it has looked at the meadow for a long time. And if it has looked 
for a long time at a body with a bright non-white colour, 2 then it will perceive 
those objects to which it later turns as if they were covered with the colour of 
that object. For when sight looks for some length of time at a meadow or at a 
bright colour irradiated by sunlight, the form of that green or bright colour 
will occur in the eye, wherein it will be fixed for some time. If the eye then 
turns to the white object while that form remains in it, it will perceive the 
whiteness of those objects as covered with the colour that has occurred in it. If 
sight has not previously perceived those white objects it will not know that 
they are white. 

[28] Now if sight perceives the white objects to be green or of some other 
non-white colour, then it will have erred in regard to their colour; but what a 
colour is can be perceived only by recognition; and, therefore, the error of 
sight in such a case | will be an error in recognition, the cause of which is that 
[the condition of] sight itself has fallen outside the moderate range as a result 
of the change that has occurred in it. For a sound eye in which no accident has 


III. 7 

occurred that corrupts its form will perceive the colours of objects as they are, 
provided that all other conditions for perceiving those objects as they are fall 
within the range of moderateness. 

[29] Again, when the eye suffers from a dimness of sight or some other 
disease that brings about a change in its form without preventing it completely 
from perceiving visible objects, it will not in that condition truly perceive the 
form of the object, but may nevertheless liken the perceived object to similar 
objects known to it. But sight may err in likening an object to others that 
resemble it in the properties perceived of it, without ascertaining that object’s 
form. 

[30] Now if sight assimilates an object to another and believes it to be that 
111 76b other without this being the case, | then it will have erred either in regard to the 

object’s individuality, or species, or both; and this will be an error of 
recognition, the cause of which is that the [condition of the] eye is not within 
the moderate range. 

[31] It is now clear from what we have explained how the errors of sight in 
recognition depend on each of the causes of visual error. 


CHAPTER 7 

ON THE WAYS IN WHICH SIGHT ERRS IN INFERENCE 

[1] It was shown in the Second Book that most of the properties perceived 
by the sense of sight are perceived by inference only, and it was shown what 
these properties are. It was also shown that the forms of all visible objects are 
hi 77a composed of the particular properties. | Now most visual errors in regard to 
particular properties and forms of visible objects are errors in inference. And 
errors in inference are of two kinds: errors in the premisses and errors in the 
composition of the inference . 1 And errors in the premisses occur in three 
ways: one is that the judging faculty takes a false premiss and believes it to be 
true; the second is that it takes a particular premiss and believes it to be 
universal. The third is when error occurs in the acquisition of premisses: in 
regard to vision this happens when, looking at an object that has some 
conspicuous properties and some inconspicuous ones that become evident 
[only] through further contemplation, sight relies on the conspicuous proper- 
ties and fails to inspect and thoroughly contemplate all the object’s properties, 
either because of lack of attention and insufficient discernment or because 
sight is not for the moment able to contemplate the object. But if sight does 
not inspect all properties in the object that are perceptible to it, and relying on 
the conspicuous properties, it asserts the conclusions [to be drawn] from 


Optics 


279 


177b 


II 7$a 


278 

them, then it will have erred in the conclusions it perceives [to flow] from 
those properties. For when sight thoroughly contemplates the object, thus 
gaining a perception of the existing properties it [previously] failed to 
perceive, then the conclusion drawn from the properties | made manifest by 
this contemplation in conjunction with the conspicuous properties will not be 
the same as that drawn from the conspicuous properties alone. But sight will 
not assert the conclusion of the conspicuous properties when it is unable to 
contemplate the object thoroughly in awareness of this inability; such a 
conclusion will appear doubtful and uncertain to it. Therefore when sight fails 
to inspect all properties of the object, or finds itself unable to inspect them, 
and, relying on the conspicuous properties, it accepts their conclusions and, 
moreover, regards them as indubitable, then it will have erred in the inference 
in as much as it will have made an error in acquiring the premisses of this 
inference and in drawing a conclusion from some of the premisses when all of 
them should have been taken into account. Thus we have set out the ways in 
which errors of sight occur in inference. 

A. Errors of sight in inference 
when the distance of the visible object 
falls outside the moderate range 

A(i) 

[2] Objects standing on the surface of the ground, such as palms, trees and 
columns, provide an example of how sight may err in inference regarding 
distance when the distance [itself] has fallen outside the moderate range: when 
these objects are at excessively great and unequal distances [from the eye], and 
assuming that they lie on separate lines so that they do not conceal one 
another, | and further that their forms are similar in colour and in the light that 
illuminates them, then sight will not perceive the inequality of the distances of 
such objects, nor will it differentiate between the far and the near among them 
if the nearest one is excessively far. It might consequently take these objects, 
or some of them, to be equally distant. But if sight believes unequally distant 
objects to be equally distant, then it will have made an error in regard to their 
distances; and error in regard to distances and their inequality or equality is an 
error in inference, since these properties are perceived only by inference. The 
cause of this error will be that the distances of such objects have fallen outside 
the moderate range. For when these objects are at moderate distances sight 
will perceive the existing inequality of their distances, provided that other 
properties of these objects are within the range of moderateness. 

[3] Sight fails to perceive the inequality of these objects from excessively 
great distances only because it cannot ascertain the magnitude of such 


III. 7 

! -sb distances and, in consequence, | cannot perceive the amount by which some of 
them exceed others; and if sight fails to perceive that, and these objects do not 
conceal one another, then sight will not differentiate the far from the near 
among them. This same error occurs whenever one looks at [a group] of stars 
which happen to include one of the planets, for by looking at a fixed star and a 
planet at the same time sight will not perceive the difference between their 
distances, but rather perceive them both in the same plane despite the great 
difference between their distances. This error of sight can only be due to the 
great distances of the stars, because sight cannot perceive the magnitude of 
great distances nor the amount by w r hich some of them exceed others, and 
because it is able to perceive only the magnitude of moderate distances that 
extend along a succession of bodies. If the seen objects are exceedingly far and 
do not conceal one another, sight will not perceive the magnitude of their 

:i - ya distances whether or not these distances | extend along ordered bodies. 

A(2) 

[4] Sight may err in regard to the positions of visible objects when their 
distance falls outside the moderate range. Thus, when looking at an exceed- 
ingly distant object which is oblique to the radial lines and not frontally 
oriented, sight will perceive the object as if it were in the frontal position and 
not sense its obliquity. It is for this reason that sight perceives the square or 
circular surface of a body from an exceedingly great distance to be oblong 
when these bodies are oblique to the radial lines. If sight sensed the obliquity 
of the square or circular body to the radial lines from an exceedingly large 
distance, then it would sense the equality of the sides of the square and the 
circularity of the circular body from that distance. This error, then, is an error 
in inference since the position of a body is perceptible [only] by inference, and 
the cause of this error is that the object’s distance has exceeded the moderate 
range. For sight will perceive the square as square and the circular as circular 

11 7 <)b when they are perceived from a moderate distance, | even when they incline to 

the radial lines, provided that the remaining properties of those objects fall 
within the moderate range. 

[5] The reason why sight perceives an oblique object from an excessively 
great distance to be frontally oriented, and why it perceives the square and the 
circle to be rectangular is that it perceives obliquity from its awareness 1 of the 
difference between the distances [from the eye] of the two edges of the oblique 
object. If sight senses the difference between the distances of these extremities, 
then it will sense the object’s obliquity; if it does not sense that difference, then 
it will not sense the obliquity. Now if the distance of the object is too great in 
relation to the size of the oblique object, then the difference between the 
distances of its two edges will be small in relation to the whole distance, and, 


19 



280 


Optics 


281 


[ 80a 


Sob 


If 8 1 a 


III. 7 


in consequence, sight will not perceive that difference. But if it does not, then 
it will believe the object’s two edges to be equally distant [from it] and 
therefore believe the object to be frontally oriented and fail to sense its 
obliquity. 

[6] In the case of a square | at an exceedingly large distance and inclined to 
the radial lines, the angle subtended by its breadth, namely its inclined 
breadth, will be smaller than that subtended by its length, or frontal length. 
Again, in the case of an oblique circular object which is exceedingly distant, 
the angle subtended in the eye by its oblique diameter will be smaller than that 
subtended by the frontal diameter. When the distance is excessively great sight 
does not sense the difference between the distances of the two extremities of 
the oblique dimension; 1 consequently it will believe these two distances to be 
equal. That being so, it will perceive the size of the square's oblique breadth 
and the circle’s oblique diameter by reference to an angle smaller than that 
subtended by the frontal length, and consequently perceive the breadth to be 
shorter than the length. It will therefore perceive the square or the circular 
object to be oblong and thus, as a result of erring in regard to the position of 
such objects, sight will have erred in regard to their shape and the size of their 
breadth as well as | their position. When these objects are at a moderate 
distance sight will perceive the difference between the distances of their edges 
and consequently perceive their true obliquity and their true shapes, provided 
that the remaining properties in these objects are in the moderate range. 

[7] Sight may also perceive such objects from distances that are not 
excessively great to be oblong and sense their obliquity, provided that the 
square or circular body is very oblique. But this happens when sight does not 
perceive the true obliquity of the object, taking it to be less than it is, and 
senses the magnitude of the oblique side in accordance with its perceived 
inclination. Now if what sight perceives of the side’s obliquity is less than its 
true obliquity, then it will perceive the side’s magnitude to be less than its true 
magnitude; and if, in addition, it perceives the object’s frontal length as it is, 
then it will perceive the square and the circular object as oblong while sensing 
their obliquity. But the error that occurs | in regard to these shapes when sight 
senses their obliquity will be small in comparison with what occurs in the case 
of excessively great distances: if sight senses the obliquity of these shapes it 
will perceive in them a certain elongation which is less than that perceived 
from an excessively large distance and which depends on the difference 
between the true obliquity and the visible obliquity sensed by the eye. 

A(3) 

[8] As was shown earlier, 1 sight senses solidity as a result of sensing the 
bending of surfaces. Now to sense the bending in the surfaces of bodies is to 


sense what kind of surface the body has and, therefore, error in regard to 
solidity, when such occurs, must be due to error in regard to the figure of the 
surface of the body. For error occurs when [for example] sight perceives a 
plane object to be convex; and if sight perceives a plane object as convex, or 
vice versa , then it will have erred in regard to the figure of that object’s surface. 
Now the figure of a surface is nothing but the shape of the surface as a whole, 2 
the shape of a surface being of two kinds — namely the shape of the surface’s 
periphery and the shape of the whole surface which is called its figure. That 
H8ib being so, error | in regard to solidity comes under error in regard to shape 
together with error in regard to position when the distance is excessively 
great. The shape of an object may also be mistaken when the distance is too 
great even when the object’s position is not mistaken. For a many-sided body 
of equal diameters will be perceived as circular when it lies at a very great 
distance in a frontal position with respect to the eye. But to perceive a 
polygonal body as circular is to mistake its shape, and to mistake a shape or 
figure when they are very far is an error in inference. For though sight may 
perceive a familiar shape or figure from a moderate distance by recognition, 
the original perception must have been the result of inference. In the case of 
excessively great distances the perception must involve inference at the time of 
sensation whether the shape is familiar or unfamiliar. For the shape of an 
object seen from a very large distance can be perceived only by contemplation, 
not at a glance nor by means of distinctive marks; and, therefore, to mistake 
the shape from a very great distance must be an error in inference, the 
(1182a cause of which is that the object’s distance falls outside the range) of 
moderateness. For sight perceives the shape of a polygonal object from a 
moderate distance as it is, provided that other properties in the object fall 
within the moderate range. 

[9] The reason why a polygonal object is perceived to be circular from an 
excessively great distance is that a visible object becomes invisible at a very 
great distance; and the distance at which an object becomes invisible depends 
on the object’s magnitude, so that a small object will disappear at a shorter 
distance than that from which a large object may be visible. Now any part of 
an object is smaller than the whole. Therefore, when the object is placed at an 
excessively great distance [from the eye], a [certain] magnitude having a 
sensible ratio to the whole will cease to be visible, and thus no [equally] small 
part of the object will be visible by itself. That being so, sight will perceive an 
excessively far object as a whole without perceiving every one of its parts by 
itself. And since every comer of a polygonal object is smaller than the whole, 
in szb and its angles are separate, none of them will appear to the eye | from a distance 
at which the object as a whole may be visible. If the object is excessively 
distant to the extent at which none of its angles is individually apparent, while 


282 


Optics 


III. 7 


the object remains visible as a whole from that distance; and, further, 
assuming that the object’s diameters are equal or nearly so; then it will be 
visible as a whole from that distance, but not its angles. And if sight perceives 
the object as a whole without perceiving its angles, and the object is of equal 
diameters and frontally faces the eye, then sight will perceive it as circular 
whether it is plane or solid. It is for this reason, therefore, that a polygonal 
object of equal diameters appears circular from an excessively great distance 
when it frontally faces the eye. 

[10] Error may also occur in regard to the curvature of a body at a very great 
distance. Thus if the convexity or concavity of such a body faces the eye, sight 
will perceive such a curved body to be plane, since curvature is perceptible 
only by perceiving the difference between the distances of the parts of the 

83a body whose convexity or concavity faces the eyes. | For, sensing that the 
middle of the object, or points close to it, is nearer to the eye than the object’s 
edges, 1 sight will sense that the object is curved and that it is convex towards 
the eye. And sensing that the middle, or points close to it, is farther from the 
eye than the edges, sight will sense that the object is curved and concave with 
regard to the eye. But when the object is exceedingly remote, and its convex 
or concave surface faces the eye, sight will not perceive the difference between 
the distance of its middle and that of its edges 1 [from the eye], and failing to 
perceive this difference it will not perceive the object’s curvature. If sight does 
not at the moment [of looking] perceive the object’s curvature, then, assum- 
ing it has no prior knowledge of this curvature, it will fail to distinguish 
between it and other, plane, familiar objects. And since the majority of 
familiar oblong bodies are straight or almost so in length, sight will at once 
perceive that object to be plane if it fails to sense its curvature. Now if sight 
perceives a curved object as plane, then it will have mistaken the object’s 
shape, and to err in regard to shape at an excessively great distance is an error 
in inference, since shape can be perceived from such a distance only by 

83b inference. The cause of this | error is that the distance of the object has 
exceeded the moderate range, for sight perceives a curved object at a moderate 
distance as curved and makes no mistake in regard to it, whether the object’s 
convexity or concavity faces the eye or not, provided that other properties in 
the object are within the moderate range. 

A (4) 

[11] Sight may also mistake the shape of an object’s surface for the reason 
that that object’s distance has exceeded the moderate range. A spherical body 
thus appears plane and circular from an excessively great distance, and all 
convex bodies or those with convex parts appear plane from such distances; 
and the same holds for concave bodies or those with concave parts in them. 


283 

Examining a convex or concave body from an excessively great distance the 
experimenter will find that it appears plane. This is an error in inference 
because convexity, concavity and planeness are perceptible by inference. The 
cause of this error is that the object’s distance has fallen outside the moderate 
:ivlJ range, because convex or concave bodies, | or those that have convex or 
concave parts in them, are perceived from moderate distances as they are, 
provided that the other properties in them are within the moderate range. 

[12] The reason why a sphere or convex body appears plane from a very 
great distance is that convexity is perceptible only when the eye senses the 
nearness of the object’s middle parts and the remoteness of its extreme parts; 
convexity of an object will not be sensed if sight fails to perceive that some 
parts of the object are nearer than others. Now when a sphere or a convex 
body is excessively remote in comparison with its size, the difference between 
the distance ofits edges and that ofits middle will be small in comparison with 
the whole distance, and therefore, sight will fail to perceive this difference and 
consequently fail to perceive the object’s convexity. It will therefore perceive 
the sphere or convex body from an excessively great distance to be plane. It is 

:n ub for this reason too that the sun and the moon appear | plane, though they are 
spherical, because of their excessively great distance from the eye. When 
spherical or convex bodies are at a moderate distance sight will perceive the 
difference between the distances of their parts and sense the bending of their 
surfaces; and in consequence of this it will perceive their convexity or 
sphericity (if they are spherical) and their solidity. The same thing holds for 
concave bodies when they are at excessively great distances, for sight will not 
perceive their concavity as a result of not perceiving the difference between the 
distances of their edges and those of their middles. When these bodies are at 
moderate distances, then this difference and the bodies’ concavity become 
perceptible. 

A(5) 

[13] Sight may also mistake the size of an object for the reason that the 
object’s distance has exceeded the moderate range. Thus an object perceived 
from an excessively great distance will appear smaller than its real size. And 
since size can be perceived only by inference, this will be an error in inference. 
The cause of this error will be that the object’s distance has fallen outside the 

111 8 sa moderate range, for the size of an object at a moderate distance] will be 
perceived as it is; sight will not mistake the size of such an object if other 
conditions for perceiving that object as it is fall within the moderate range. 

[14] The reason why sight perceives an object at an excessively great 
distance to be smaller than its real magnitude is that the size of an object is 
perceptible only by estimating the object’s size by the angle of the cone that 


Optics 


28 4 

surrounds it together with the magnitude of the object’s distance. 1 This we 
have shown to be so in our discussion of the manner of perceiving size. 2 Now 
when the object is exceedingly far the angle of the cone encompassing it will 
be extremely small. Further, the excessively great distance at which the 
magnitude of an object appears smaller than its real magnitude is that at which 
a magnitude having a measurable ratio 3 to the whole object ceases to be 
visible. For the distance at which a magnitude having a measurable ratio to the 
seen object does not cease to be visible is one of the moderate distances at 
which the object is perceptible as | it is. That being so, sight will not in this case 
sense the part of the angle subtended by that portion of the object which has a 
measurable ratio to the whole object and which is equal to (a magnitude] that 
is not visible at that distance; nor will it sense that part of the sentient organ’s 
surface in which the form of that portion [of the object] occurs and which 
subtends that part of the angle. Moreover, that angle will have a measurable 
ratio to the whole angle subtended by the whole object. And, similarly, that 
part of the eye’s surface which subtends this angle will have a measurable ratio 
to the whole part of the eye’s surface in which the form of the whole object 
occurs, because this ratio is equal to the measurable ratio between the portion 
which is equal to a magnitude that is not visible at that distance and the whole 
of that object. But for every exceedingly distant object, neither that part of the 
sentient organ’s surface, nor the part of the angle subtended by that portion of 
the object which has a measurable ratio to the whole object and which is equal 
to [a magnitude] that is not visible at that distance, will be perceptible. Thus 
when sight contemplates that object by moving the axis over its dimensions, 
the sentient will not sense the motion of the axis | until after it has covered a 
part of the area occupied by the form of the whole object, which is greater than 
the part occupied by the form of that portion of the object which is equal to a 
magnitude that cannot be seen from that distance. The sentient will not 
therefore sense the motion of the axis over that part of the area occupied by the 
object’s form, which is equal to a magnitude that cannot be seen from that 
distance, nor will it acquire through the motion of the axis over that part a 
sensation of a form or angle. 

[15] Again, when the axis moves over the whole object, the sentient will not 
sense its motion as it covers a portion of the object equal to a magnitude that is 
invisible from that distance. The sentient will, however, sense the motion of the 
axis when it covers a part greater than that portion. So that, when the axis 
reaches the portions of the object and covers the whole part of the sentient organ 
in which the object’s form occurs, [the sentient] will perceive that part to be 
smaller than its real size, for the reasons we have set out in detail. 

[16] Moreover, when the eye is fixed before that object and the sentient 
perceives the portion 1 of the eye’s surface in which the form of the object 


III. 7 285 

in 86b occurs, it will perceive the size of that portion | and the size of the angle 
subtended by it by perceiving the interval between the two limits of the extent 
of that portion of the eye’s surface. Now that interval is extremely small, and 
the perceived limits of that portion are not imaginary points 2 (for an imagin- 
ary point is not perceptible, the sense[-faculty] being able to perceive only that 
which has magnitude). Therefore the limit by means of which the sense 
[-faculty] defines the extent of that portion is a part of the extent of that 
portion. That part or limit is, to the sense, a point that has no magnitude 
which the sense[-faculty] can take into consideration, though it has a magni- 
tude that bears a measurable ratio to the interval or width of the portion 
occupied by the object’s form. Thus the limit by means of which the sentient 
defines the portion occupied by the form of the excessively distant object has a 
measurable ratio to the extent of that portion, although its magnitude is 
ignored by the sentient. 3 For that portion is extremely small, its width being 
only a little larger than that sensible point or limit. Therefore that sensible 
point or limit of the width of the portion occupied by the form of the 

11187a excessively distant object | bears a measurable ratio to the width of that 
portion and thus contributes to the magnitude of that portion; none the less, 
this point is the limit whose magnitude the sentient ignores. When, therefore, 
sight perceives the magnitude of the width of the portion occupied by the 
form of the excessively remote object, it perceives it to be smaller than its real 
magnitude by the amount of the two points or limits of that width, these two 
points being two parts that have a measurable ratio to the whole of that width. 
Similarly, the sentient will perceive the angle subtended by the portion of the 
eye’s surface in which the form occurs to be smaller than its real magnitude by 
the amount subtended by those two points or limits of that portion’s width, 
whose magnitudes are ignored by the sentient. Because of this the sentient 
perceives all portions of the eye in which the forms of visible objects occur to 
be smaller [than their real magnitude] by an amount equal to the two points or 
limits of the extent of each portion. It is also in the same way that the sentient 
perceives all angles which all visible objects subtend at the centre of the eye. 
But, with regard to a moderately distant object, the two parts of the object 
whose forms occupy the two points or limits of the width of the portion 

HI 87b occupied by the object’s form will have no | magnitude that contributes to the 
total magnitude of the object; for these two points have no [appreciable] 
magnitude in relation to the whole portion of the eye’s surface where the form 
of the moderately distant object occurs; and, similarly, the two angles 
subtended by those two points will have no [appreciable] magnitude in 
relation to the whole angle. But when the object is at a disproportionately 
great distance, then the two points or limits of the extent of the portion of the 
surface of the eye that is occupied by the object’s form will be of a magnitude 


286 


Optics 


287 


chat contributes to [the magnitude of] that whole portion. For the whole 
portion in which the form of an excessively remote object occurs will have 
decreased so much that it has become extremely small, whereas the point or 
limit (which is the smallest perceptible part of the eye’s surface) is of one and 
the same, constant magnitude, whether the portion occupied by the form is 
large or small, since nothing smaller than that point can be perceived by the 
sense. But the part of the object whose form occurs at that point when the 
object is excessively remote will bear a greater [ratio to the whole object] than 
the part of the object whose form occurs at that point when the object is 
moderately distant . 4 And so the magnitude of the two parts of the object 
11 sNa whose forms occur at those two points will have an | appreciably large ratio to 
the whole object if the latter is excessively remote; and, therefore, the two 
angles subtended at the eye’s centre by those two parts, though imperceptible, 
will be of a magnitude that contributes to the whole angle subtended by the 
whole object at the excessively great distance. And. for every object that is 
perceptible from a very great distance, the portion of the eye in which the 
form of that object occurs and the angle subtended at the centre of the eye by 
that object will be perceived by the sentient to be smaller than their real 
magnitudes by an amount that affects their total magnitudes as determined by 
that excessive distance. 

[17] It was shown, moreover, that when the distance of the object is 
ascertained 1 and it is one of the moderate distances for that object, then the 
perceived size of that object will be certain ; 1 and if the object’s distance is not 
ascertained, then neither will be its perceived size. It was also shown that sight 
does not clearly perceive the magnitude of the distance of an excessively 
11 88 b remote object whether that distance extends along ordered bodies or not. | It 
was also shown that when sight cannot ascertain the magnitude of an object’s 
distance, then it makes a conjecture in regard to that magnitude, likening the 
distance of the object to that of familiar objects which resemble that object in 
size and in the general appearance of the form that sight perceives of it from 
familiar distances. That being so, sight will conjecturally imagine the distance 
of an excessively remote object to be smaller than its real magnitude, because 
it assimilates that distance to the distances of familiar objects which it 
perceives in the case of familiar objects that subtend angles equal to that 
subtended by that excessively remote object. But none of the familiar 
distances from which familiar objects are perceived are excessively great, and 
therefore sight cannot but conjecture the magnitude of the distance of an 
excessively remote object to be smaller than its real magnitude. And sight will 
perceive the angle subtended by the excessively distant object to be smaller 
than its real magnitude and the excessively remote object to be smaller than its 


III. 7 

real size. 2 But the size of an object’s magnitude can be perceived only by 
reference to the angle subtended by it at the centre of the eye and by reference 3 
to the size of the distance of that magnitude. Therefore sight will perceive the 
size of an excessively remote object by estimating its magnitude by means of 
an angle smaller than the real angle subtended by | that object at that distance 
and by means of a distance smaller than its real distance. 4 It is for this reason 
that sight perceives the distance of an excessively remote object to be smaller 
than its real magnitude; and the farther the object is the smaller its size will 
appear, because the error in regard to the angle subtended by that object will 
increase as the distance increases, 5 and because the amount of difference 
between the real distance of the object and the imagined magnitude of the 
object’s apparent distance will also increase with the object’s remoteness; for 
this reason the farther the object gets the smaller its size will appear, until it 
reaches the limit of remoteness at which it ceases to be visible. 

[18] The limit at which the object as a whole ceases to be visible is that at 
which the portion of the eye where the object’s form occurs is a point whose 
size is too imperceptible to be appreciated bv the sentient, so that the form of 
the object in this case becomes like the form of an extremely small object 
which it is not in the power of the sense to perceive on account of its smallness 
even when it is close to the eye. 

;ns(jb [19] Again, | when the visible object moves away too far the form of its 

colour fades and weakens. 1 For it was shown that the form of colour weakens 
as it recedes from the colour from which it emanates, and that the same holds 
for the form of light. Thus if the object has a delicate or cloudy colour and is 
excessively far from the eye, it may become invisible at a distance from which 
an object of equal size but with a bright and strong colour will be perceptible. 
For the form of a delicate colour is weaker than that of a strong colour and 
therefore ceases to be visible at a shorter distance that that from which the 
form of a strong colour becomes invisible. 

[20] An object may also cease to be visible because its colour becomes 
confused with the colours of objects around it or in line with it. Some other 
bodies always exist behind, below or round visible objects on the surface of 
the ground, and sight perceives the bodies that surround a visible object or lie 
behind, below or in line with it upon perceiving that object. If the object is 
excessively far and its colour resembles the colours of those objects, then it 
Wyoa may become so obscure that sight fails to distinguish] it from the other 
perceived bodies surrounding it or in line with it because of its being confused 
with them. Examples are provided by earth-coloured bodies on the surface of 
the ground, bright-green bodies in the middle of fields or among the leaves of 
trees, homogeneously white bodies in the midst of snow, and by a body 
behind or below or round which there exists a larger one with a similar colour. 


288 


Optics 


289 


Many such bodies, when they are at an excessively great distance, cease to be 
visible and sight fails to distinguish them from others it perceives at the same 
time because of confusing their colours with the colours of these other bodies. 
When there exist in those same places and at the same distances other objects of 
equal size but with different colours from the colours of those bodies, sight 
will perceive those objects from those same distances, and therefore the 
inapparentness of the object [in this case] must be due to its colour being 
confused with those of neighbouring bodies. 

[21] An object may cease to be visible | because its colour is delicate and its 
form is weak. Such a body does not become invisible because the form of it 
that occurs in the eye has become small, but because the form becomes 
confused with that of other objects perceived together with it or because of its 
weakness. For the distance at which an object ceases to be visible on account of 
smallness is that for which the cone imagined to be produced between it and 
the centre of the eye cuts off from the surface of the sentient organ a part equal 
in magnitude to an imperceptible point; that distance is the shortest distance at 
which the object ceases to be visible because the object’s form has become 
small. At any distance greater than that distance the object will cease to be 
visible, and the cone drawn to the object from the eye’s centre will cut off from 
the surface of the sentient organ a smaller part than the first part which was cut 
off at the shortest distance and which is imperceptible because ofits smallness. 

[22] Error also occurs in regard to the size of some visible objects the 
magnitude of whose distances is certain. This happens in the case of exces- 
sively small objects. | Such an object ceases to be visible at a distance that is not 
excessively great when this distance falls outside the moderate range for the 
size of that object. For the distance at which an extremely small object 
disappears may extend along a succession of continuous bodies, in which case 
the magnitude of the distance will be ascertainable if the distance is not 
excessively large. If an object disappears on account of the magnitude of its 
distance, then before it reaches that distance sight may perceive it to be smaller 
than its real size. For as the object gets farther and farther from the eye, it will 
first appear to become smaller, and then disappear from view (if such 
disappearance is related to the object’s size). Thus sight may perceive an 
extremely small object to be smaller than its real size from a distance of 
ascertained magnitude. But the ascertained distance at which the object ceases 
to be visible and that at which the object appears smaller than its real size is one 
that falls outside the moderate range for that object. If the distance exceeds 
moderateness for a given object, | and the object as a whole is visible from that 
distance, then a magnitude having a measurable ratio to the whole object will 
be invisible from that distance. 


III. 7 

[23] Again, the distance from which a small object appears smaller than its 
[real] size may be one at which there disappears a magnitude which is smaller 
than that object and which would be perceptible from a shorter distance; for an 
object whose size appears smaller to the eye is not the smallest magnitude that 
can be perceived by the eye. But an object which ceases to be visible from that 
distance, while being perceptible from a shorter distance, bears a measurable 
ratio to the size of the small object whose magnitude appears smaller from that 
distance; for an object perceived from a certain distance must in any event bear 
a measurable ratio to any excessively small object. Therefore the distance 
from which sight perceives an excessively small object to be smaller than its 
real size is one from which a magnitude having a measurable ratio to the whole 

11192a of that object will disappear. That being | so, the sentient will perceive the 
angle subtended by a small object from an immoderate distance for that object 
to be smaller than its real size, as was shown earlier. 1 And if the magnitude of 
that distance is ascertained, sight will perceive an excessively small object that 
disappears as a whole from a distance whose magnitude is ascertained, to be 
smaller than its real size, because of sight’s error in regard to the size of the 
angle subtended by that small object from that distance. For it will perceive 
the object’s size by estimating it by an angle smaller than the real angle 
subtended by that object from that distance and by the ascertained distance of 
the object. Therefore the error of sight in perceiving the size of an object from 
an excessively great distance whose magnitude it has not ascertained is due 
both to error in regard to the size of the angle subtended by that object and 

11192b error in regard to the magnitude of the distance of that object. For sight | likens 

the object’s size to that of a moderately distant object that subtends an angle 
smaller than that subtended in this case by that object. That is why sight 
perceives an excessively remote object to be smaller than its real magnitude. 
As for the error that occurs in perceiving the size of an object at a distance 
whose magnitude is ascertained, this is due solely to sight’s error in regard to 
the angle subtended by the object in this case. Thus we have shown the reason 
why an object at an immoderately great distance for the size of that object 
appears smaller than its real magnitude. 

[24] Again, if an object comes immoderately close to the eye, sight will 
perceive it to be greater than its real size and, therefore, err in regard to its size. 
This will be an error in inference because size can be perceived only by 
inference, and the cause of this error will be that the object’s distance has fallen 
outside the moderate range. For the object that appears from a very short 

W w distance to be greater than its real size | is perceived from moderate distances as 
it is, provided that all other properties in that object are within the moderate 
range. 


290 


Optics 


29 1 


[25] The reason why sight perceives a very near object to be larger than its 
real size is that sight perceives the size of an object by estimating its magnitude 
by the size of the angle of the cone that surrounds that object together with the 
distance between the eye and the object. When the object is very close to the 
eye the angle encompassing it will be large and the distance with which the 
faculty of judgement compares the object’s magnitude, thereby perceiving the 
object’s size, is the distance of the object from the surface of the eye. For sight 
perceives the magnitude of a distance by perceiving the bodies ordered along 
this distance; and the distance along which bodies are ordered and which is 
always perceived and measured by sight is the object’s distance from the 
1 03b surface of the eye. Now the distance with reference to which | sight perceives 
the true size of the object is that between the object and the centre of the eye. 
Therefore, between the distance with which the faculty of judgement com- 
pares the object’s size and the distance with which comparison ought to be 
made, there is a difference equal to half the diameter of the eyeball. But the 
magnitudes of moderate distances at which sight perceives familiar objects 
and with which the faculty of judgement always compares the sizes of objects 
are not affected by the magnitude of the eyeball’s radius; that is why sight can 
perceive the true sizes of objects at moderate distances, there being no sensible 
difference between the perceived sizes and the true ones. When the object is 
very close to the eye, however, the distance between it and the surface of the 
eye will be very small (this being the distance with which the judging faculty 
compares the object’s size), and therefore the difference between this distance 
and that with which comparison ought to be made (which difference is half 
194a the diameter of the eyeball) will be significant. For when the object | is very 
close to the eye and sight perceives it to be greater than its real magnitude, its 
distance from the surface of the eye might be equal to or less than half the 
diameter of the eyeball. If the distance from which the object appears larger 
than it is is slightly greater than half the diameter of the eyeball, then the 
amount of difference between the distance with which the faculty of judge- 
ment compares the object’s magnitude and that with which comparison ought 
to be made will either be equal to the distance with which the comparison is 
made or greater than this distance or will bear a large ratio to it. Thus the size 
of a very close object will be [obtained] by estimating the object’s magnitude 
by the angle of the cone surrounding the object, which is a large angle, and by 
comparison with a distance which is smaller than the distance with which 
comparison ought to be made by an amount equal to, greater than, or having a 
large ratio to, the distance with which comparison is made. That is why sight 
94b perceives | a very close object to be greater than its true size. As the object gets 
closer to the eye the difference between the distance with which comparison is 
made and that with which comparison ought to be made becomes larger. And 


III. 7 

that is why the object appears larger as it gets closer to the eye. We have thus 
shown the reason why sight perceives a very near object to be greater than its 
real size, and why it appears to grow in size as it gets nearer to the eye. 

A(6) 

[26] Sight may err in regard to separation on account of excessively great 
distance. For let the surface of a large and multi-coloured body be divided by 
one of these colours in one place or in a number of separate places, and let the 
dividing colour | be dark and the place in which this colour exists on the 
surface of the body be fairly wide. Such a body, when perceived from an 
excessively great distance, will appear as consisting of neighbouring but 
separate bodies, provided that the beholder had no previous knowledge of it; 
sight will believe the dark colour that interrupts that body to be a gap between 
those bodies, and thus perceive the continuous body as being discontinuous. 
Among such bodies in regard to which this kind of error occurs when 
perceived from an excessively great distance are walls with embedded or 
facing wooden uprights. 

[27] Again, suppose that the sun shines on a broad or light-coloured body 
across which one or more separate shadows have fallen; looking at such a body 

iiysb from an excessively great distance a beholder who had no previous | know- 
ledge of that body and who is unaware of the shadow-casting objects or of the 
fact that the dark-coloured places are shadows, will perceive it as consisting of 
neighbouring but separate bodies. 

[28] This also is an error in inference because separation is perceptible only 
by inference. The cause of this error is that the distance of the object has 
exceeded the moderate range, since sight perceives a continuous object from a 
moderate distance as being continuous, even when the object is variously 
coloured or interrupted by shadows or wooden strips, provided that the other 
properties of that object are within the moderate range. 

A(7) 

[ 29 ] Error may also occur in regard to continuity when distance is exces- 
sively great. Thus, looking from such a distance at similarly coloured bodies, 
whether contiguous or separated by small spaces, sight will perceive them, in 

in 96a the absence of prior knowledge of them, as a single, continuous body. For | a 
small gap between objects, or their contiguity, may not be visible from a great 
distance at which they are all perceptible, if they are larger than the width of 
the gap; by failing to perceive the separation between such bodies sight will 
perceive them as one continuous body. Among objects of this description are 
those screens made up of joined planks of wood which are sometimes set up 
on top of walls. Looking at such planks from a very great distance, and 


292 


Optics 


293 


assuming that the light does not show through their joints, sight will perceive 
them as one continuous body and will not be aware of those joints. This is so 
also with bedsteads that are made up of wooden planks which are closely 
joined together: sight will perceive a bedstead of this description from a great 
distance as one continuous body without being aware of the joints between 
those planks. And the same holds for similarly joined and similarly coloured | 
bodies when the spaces between them are narrow and they are seen from a 
great distance. 

[30] But if sight perceives separate bodies as one continuous body then it 
will have erred in regard to their perceived continuity, and this will be an error 
in inference since continuity is perceptible by inference. The cause of this error 
will be that the object has exceeded the range of moderateness, because sight is 
able to perceive the separation and contiguity of such objects from moderate 
distances, and thus perceive each of those objects as it is, provided that their 
other properties are within the moderate range. 

A(8) 

[3 1] It may happen as a result of erring in regard to separation that sight may 
also err in regard to number. For if it perceives a plurality of separate objects as 
one, or a single continuous object as many separate objects, then it will have 
made an error in regard to number. 

A(9) 

[32] Error may also occur in regard to motion when the object’s distance 
exceeds the moderate range. Thus when the eye looks at the moon j or one of 
the stars while the observer moves on the ground, he will see the moon or star 
moving with him. If he then stops where he is and looks at the moon or star he 
will perceive it to be stationary during a sensible interval of time. Thus the 
observer in motion will err in regard to the perceived motion of the moon or 
star if he takes them to share in his motion; and this will be an error in inference 
since motion is perceptible by inference. The cause of this error will be that the 
distance of the object has exceeded the moderate range; for when looking at a 
stationary or slowly moving object from a moderate distance, an observer in 
motion will not perceive it as sharing in his own motion, but rather perceive it 
to be stationary or slowly moving, as the case may be, provided that other 
properties of that object are within the moderate range. 

[33] The reason why sight perceives the moon and the stars as moving with 
its own motion is that the distance covered on the ground dunng a short 
interval of time by | the observer in motion has no appreciable magnitude 
relative to the distance of the moon or stars. In this case the position of the 
moon or stars will not vary in relation to the eye or the observer’s body while 


III. 7 

he covers the interval during which he perceives the moon or stars as moving. 
But if the object’s position undergoes no change relative to the eye or the body 
of the beholder in motion, then, if he finds the object’s position in the second 
situation to be the same as in the first, himself and the object being in the same 
line as before, despite his awareness that he has moved from the first position, 
he will perceive that object to have moved with his own motion. For sight 
does not perceive an object as maintaining the same position in relation to 
itself when the beholder is in motion, unless the object has a motion equal to 
that of the beholder and in the same direction. That is why when the observer 

in 9 8a in motion looks at the moon or | a star he will perceive them as if they moved 
with him at the same rate. The same is true of error in regard to motion of the 
moon when the beholder looks at it through a thin cloud: he will believe the 
moon to be moving fast, the cause of this error being the excessively great 
distance of the moon which the beholder erroneously relates to parts of the 
cloud — as we have shown before. 1 

A(io) 

[34] Sight may err also in regard to rest when the object’s distance exceeds 
the moderate range. For suppose that the object has a slow motion and sight 
perceives it from a very great distance but without looking at it for a long time; 
and let the object on account of its slow motion cover an insensible interval in 
that short and sensible time: sight will not in this case perceive the motion of 
that object and will therefore believe it to be stationary. In the same way, sight 
fails to perceive the motion of the stars when looking at them, despite their 

ill 98b rapid motion. And this is | an error in inference because sight can perceive rest 
only by inference. The cause of this error is that the distance of the object has 
exceeded the moderate range; because when the object is at a moderate 
distance and has a motion equal to that of the star, 1 sight will perceive its 
motion in a time equal to that during which the object would appear 
stationary from an excessively great distance. 

[35] The following is the reason why sight perceives a moving object from 
an excessively great distance to be stationary if it does not look long at the 
object. An object at such a distance will in a sensible period of time cover an 
insensible interval by comparison with that distance, regardless of whether its 
motion is straight or circular; I mean that it will cover in a sensible period of 
time an interval that is not perceptible from that distance. Sight will, however, 
perceive an object as stationary if, in the course of a sensible period of time, the 
object is perceived to be in the same position relative to the eye or 

[ n 99a to some other body. But if the object in motion covers in a sensible time | an 
interval which is not sensible from the excessively great distance, then, while 
looking at such an object from such a distance, and from a fixed position, for 


\[ 99 b 


I iooa 


II ioob 


294 Optics 

only a short time, the object will cover during that time an imperceptible 
interval by comparison with that distance. That being so, sight will perceive 
the object during that time to be in the same position relative to the eye and 
will thus believe the object to have maintained its position; sight will therefore 
perceive the object to be stationary as a result of having perceived it in the same 
position during a sensible interval of time. It is for this reason, then, that sight 
perceives an object from a very great distance to be at rest if it does not look 
long at the object. 

[36] Error may also occur in regard to rest in another way. For suppose that 
sight perceives from an excessively great distance an object moving rec- 
tilinearlv , but not very fast, | along the interval between the eye and the object 
and which runs parallel 1 to the radial lines that extend to the object; sight will 
perceive such an object under these conditions as stationary and will not be 
aware of the object’s motion, whether the object moves away from or 
towards the eye. For sight perceives rectilinear motion when the moving 
object is seen in line with one part after another of a given body, or in line with 
one body after another, or when sight perceives the interval covered by the 
moving object while being aware of the motion. For if it perceives the interval 
covered, then it will perceive the moving object in line with that part of the 
body that is in line with the beginning of the interval, then perceive it in line 
with the part of that body that is in line with the end of that | interval. It is in 
these ways that motion is perceived. 

[37] When sight perceives the object for a short time from an excessively 
great distance while the object moves along the ray extending to it from the 
eye, it will not perceive the interval covered by the object during that time, 
because in this case sight will perceive the object as being on one and the same 
line and in one and the same position. If such an object is moving on the 
surface of the ground, sight will not perceive the interval on which it moves 
because of the object’s excessively great distance. Sight will perceive the 
motion of such a moving object only when it is aware that the object is getting 
nearer to or farther from it, and it can have no such awareness from an 
excessively great distance unless the object covers a fairly large interval. For if 
the object moved farther from the eye, sight would not sense its motion unless 
its magnitude became smaller or the distance covered by it was perceived. 
And if the object approached the eye, | sight would not sense this motion 
unless the object’s magnitude became larger or the interval covered by it was 
perceived. But an object does not appear to become smaller or larger unless it 
covers a fairly large interval; nor does sight perceive from an excessively great 
distance the interval covered by an object unless that interval is fairly large. 
When sight perceives such an object from a fixed position for only a short 
time, then, assuming the motion of the object to be not very rapid, sight will 


III. 7 295 

not perceive that motion, because the object neither covers in that short time a 
fairly large interval that is visible from an excessively great distance, nor does 
it appear to get smaller or larger. 

[38] But if sight does not sense the motion of a moving object it will believe 
the object to be at rest, and therefore err in regard to rest; and this will be an 
error in inference since rest can be perceived only by inference. The cause of 
this error will be that the object’s distance has exceeded the moderate range, 

i l0U for when an object of this description j is at a moderate distance, either lying 
on the ground or in line with a series of bodies, sight perceives the 
ground-surface or the bodies ranged along the object’s distance, and further 
perceives the interval covered by that moving object in the short time that 
would be sufficient for perceiving motions (if the object is not moving very 
slowly), and thus perceives the true motion of the object, provided that 
other conditions for perceiving that object as it is fall within the range of 
moderateness. 

A(i 1) 

[39] Error may also occur in regard to roughness when the object’s distance 
falls outside the range of moderateness. This frequently happens with paint- 
ings. For painters make their pictures and paintings look like the visible bodies 
to which they correspond, and by means of flat pictures they represent 
particular animals, individuals, plants, utensils or other solid objects, and 

iUoib their features. | For this purpose they make skilful use of colours and draw- 
ings, paying particular attention to points of resemblance. For example, when 
they make pictures of hairy animals, fuzzy plants, rough-surfaced leaves or 
visibly coarse bodies, they make them look like the visible roughness of the 
surfaces of those animals or plants or inanimate bodies by means of drawings, 
outlines and different colours, though the pictures they make are flat and 
smooth or even polished. They also make pictures of individual people, 
imitating what is visible in their forms of the outlines of their faces and bodies, 
their hair, the pores and wrinkles in their skin, and the creases in their clothes; 
thus they represent the roughness visible in their skin on account of the hair 
and the pores, and the roughness in their clothes due to their creases. Painted 
pictures will be perceived to be like the forms they represent if those who 
made them were skilled in the art of painting. Therefore looking [for example] 
at a picture of a hairy animal painted on a wall or on a piece of wood 

K 102a or paper, | sight will perceive the [painted] hair as if it were real. And, 
similarly, it will perceive the pictures of rough leaves as if they were [really] 
rough; and the same will be true of pictures of visibly rough bodies. Again it 
will perceive the painted pictures of individual men as if they were solid 
forms, their painted hairs and wrinkles and creases in their clothes appearing 


20 


296 


Optics 


297 


as [real] hairs, wrinkles and creases, although the surfaces of those pictures are 
smooth or polished. 1 

[40] But if sight perceives a smooth picture as being rough then it will have 
erred in regard to its roughness. This will be an error in inference because 
roughness can be perceived only by inference, and it will be due to one of the 
causes on which the errors of sight depend. Some such errors will have as 

:02b cause the distance of the picture from the eye, for sight can | ascertain that such 
a painted picture is smooth only by contemplation, and it can contemplate it 
only when it is very near the eye, since contemplation reveals the flatness and 
smoothness of an object’s surface only when applied to the very small parts of 
the surface, and such parts are visible only when they are very close. Sight will 
not perceive the smoothness of the picture’s surface if it is so distant that sight 
cannot perceive the position of the extremely small parts which it believes 
from that distance to be protuberant or variously situated, thus failing to 
perceive the evenness of all those parts. 

[41] Again, the surfaces of painted pictures will appear to be rough from a 
point that is not very close to them; and sight will not perceive the smoothness 
of the surfaces of painted pictures that imitate rough objects from the form of 
the visible light in their surfaces, which [form] sight has recognized 

03a in the surfaces of smooth objects, provided that | no prior knowledge exists 
that the surfaces of those pictures are [really] smooth; for the forms of 
the surfaces of these apparently rough pictures are more similar to the forms 
of [really] rough surfaces than the form of their light is to the forms of 
the lights existing in smooth surfaces, because of the skill with which the 
painters have made those pictures look like rough surfaces. Therefore the 
smoothness of such painted pictures can be perceived only by thorough 
contemplation. But sight cannot contemplate the surfaces of these pictures 
and ascertain their smoothness except when they are very near. When, 
therefore, sight perceives one of these pictures from a fairly large distance, 
they will appear to be rough and their smoothness will not be perceptible in 
this case. The moderate distance from which sight can perceive the smooth- 
ness of such pictures is the short distance at which their true smoothness can be 
contemplated. 

[42] The smoothness of these pictures (if they are smooth) may be visible 

03b from a fairly large distance | at which they [normally] appear to be fairly 

rough; this happens when the surface of the picture is so situated as to cause 
reflection of the light to the eye, which constitutes the glitter of polished 
bodies. But the surfaces of bodies may be polished and rough at the same time, 
as when their polished parts are variously situated and densely packed (as in 
the case of hair and shells and the like) so that the surface as a whole will be 
rough though each of the variously situated parts is polished. For when light is 


III. 7 

reflected from such surfaces sight will perceive that they are polished despite 
the various situations of their parts. Polishedness often appears in the surfaces 
of hairy bodies and in those with variously situated parts so that sight fails in 
this case to make sure of their properties. 

[43] That being so, sight cannot ascertain that a surface is smooth, if it 
perceives it to be polished, from a fairly large distance, | given that it has been 
established in the soul that polishedness may co-exist with roughness; the 
smoothness of such bodies can be ascertained only when they are very near. 
Sight cannot perceive the smoothness or polishedness of painted pictures that 
imitate rough bodies whose roughness is visible from a fairly large distance 
unless they are very near — that is, at the moderate distance from which their 
smoothness is perceptible. The fairly large distance from which they appear to 
be rough is one that exceeds the moderate range for those pictures. Therefore, 
the error which occurs in what sight perceives of the roughness of painted 
pictures that imitate rough bodies (though the surfaces [of those pictures] are 
smooth), when they are moderately remote and not very close to the eye, 
must be due to the fact that the distance of those pictures has exceeded the 
range within which their smoothness would be perceptible — that range being 

in 104b an interval close | to the eye. For when these pictures are near to the eye, that is 
at the moderate distance from which their smoothness is perceptible, sight 
will perceive them as being smooth, not rough, and will make no error in 
regard to their roughness, provided that their other properties are in the range 
of moderateness. 

A(I2) 

[44] Error may also occur in regard to smoothness when the object’s distance 
exceeds the moderate range. For the roughness of a slightly rough object will 
not be visible from a great distance even if it is not excessively great. For sight 
perceives roughness only by perceiving the various positions of the parts of 
the object’s surface or by perceiving the difference in the form of the light that 
exists in the object’s surface. When the roughness is slight the variously 
situated parts of the object’s surface will be small and, therefore, sight will not 
be able to discern them or their various positions from the great distance even 

in 105a if it is not excessively great, j Again, if the roughness is slight then the 
difference in the form of the light that is in the object’s surface will also be 
slight and, therefore, will not be visible from the great distance; sight will not 
be able to distinguish from this great distance between the light that is in that 
surface and the form of the light that is in a smooth surface. And by failing to 
perceive the various positions of the object’s parts and the difference in the 
form of the light that is in the object’s surface, sight will not perceive the 
object’s roughness. Rather it will perceive that object in the way it perceives 


II 105b 


[ F06j 


f 1 06b 


298 Optics 

objects whose surfaces are similarly situated, and will thus fail to discriminate 
between rough and smooth surfaces. Therefore when sight perceives a 
rough-surfaced object from a great distance it will fail to perceive its rough- 
ness. In this case, and assuming that the distance is not excessively great, it will 
liken | the object’s form to the form of similar, smooth objects and thus take 
the object to be smooth, if the beholder had no prior knowledge of its 
roughness. 

[45] Now if sight takes a rough object to be smooth it will have erred in 
regard to its [perceived] smoothness; and error in regard to smoothness is 
error in inference since smoothness is perceptible only by inference. The cause 
of this error will be that the object’s distance has exceeded the moderate range, 
for when rough bodies are at the moderate distances appropriate to them sight 
will perceive them to be rough, not smooth, if the remaining properties of 
these objects are within the range of moderateness. 

A(i 3 ) 

[46] Sight may also err in some way in regard to transparency when the 
object’s distance falls outside the moderate range. For let the observer bring 
near to one eye a slender object such as a toothpick or needle or the like, having 
covered the other eye; let there be in front of him a light-coloured wall or 
some other white body whose distance | from the eye is fairly large but not 
excessively so; that tiny body will be seen to be larger than its real size and, 
further, it will screen a part of the opposite light-coloured body equal in width 
to the apparent width of the tiny opaque object. And yet sight will be able to 
perceive the screened part of the opposite light-coloured body just as it 
perceives objects behind a transparent body; it will further perceive that tiny 
object (if it is very close to the eye) as if it were transparent, since it is as able to 
perceive what lies behind the object as it perceives what lies behind a 
transparent body. But when sight perceives an object together with what lies 
behind it, while being aware that what lies behind the object is something 
other than the object, then it perceives that object as being transparent. And if 
sight perceives an opaque object as transparent then it will have erred in what 
it perceives of the object’s transparency; and this will be an error in inference 
since transparency can be perceived only by inference. The cause of this | error 
is that the object’s distance has fallen outside the moderate range by being too 
near to the eye; for sight perceives a tiny object at a moderate distance as an 
opaque object that does not allow perception of what lies behind it, provided 
that the other properties of the object are within the moderate range. 

[47] As for the reason why a small opaque body appears to be transparent 
when it is very close to the eye, we will show later on and clearly explain it in 
the appropriate place. 1 But as for the cause of the apparent width of the object 


III. 7 299 

when it is close to the eye, we have mentioned this in our discussion of 
magnitude where we explained why an object that is very close to the eye 
appears larger than it is. 2 

A(h) 

[48] Error may also occur in regard to opacity when the object’s distance falls 
outside the moderate range. For a slightly transparent but strong-coloured 
body, behind which there exists a coloured object or a dark place, will be seen 
from a very large distance as being opaque, if the beholder has no prior 
knowledge of the transparency of that body. For sight will perceive the colour 
of a transparent object from a very large distance if that colour is 

11 107a strong. | If behind the object there exists a coloured body or a dark place, then 
that colour or darkness (if visible behind the transparent object) will appear to 
be mixed with the colour of the transparent object; sight will not be able, from 
that distance, to distinguish the colour of the transparent object from that 
which appears behind it. If, therefore, the transparent and strong-coloured 
object lies at a great distance in front of a coloured body or a dark place, sight 
will not discern its transparency and, therefore, will perceive it to be opaque. 

[49] But if sight perceives a transparent object to be opaque then it will have 
erred in regard to [the perceived] opacity, and this will be an error in inference 
since opacity can be perceived only by inference. The cause of this error will be 
that the object’s distance has exceeded the moderate range, for a transparent 
object at a moderate distance from the eye will be perceived as being 
transparent, provided that the other properties of the object are within the 
moderate range. 

A(i5) 

[50] Error may also occur in regard to shadow when the [object’s] distance is 
too great. For let the light of the sun or moon or a flame shine upon a broad 
pure white object, such as a white wall or a pure white area of the ground, 
which is interrupted in one or more places with earth-like or dark colours; 1 

ni 107b and | let that object be viewed from a great distance by someone who has had 
no prior knowledge of it. The viewer will clearly perceive the light in the 
white parts of that object to be radiant, but the light in those parts with 
earth-like or dark colours will appear subdued. 2 

[51] But if sight perceives the light as subdued in some parts of a wall or of 
the ground, then it might on this account take it to be a shadow and thus 
believe that the light is not the same throughout the surface of that wall or 
ground-area, especially if such an object lies among walls or objects for which 
it is possible to cast shadows on those dark and earth-like places. But if sight 
perceives illuminated and unshaded places to be shadowed, then it will have 


| 300 Optics 

erred in regard to the shadow it perceives of them. And this will be an error in 
inference because shadow can be perceived only by inference. The cause of 
this error will be that the object has exceeded the moderate range; for sight will 
be able to perceive the true colours and the light of such an object from a 

108a moderate distance, | provided that the other properties of the object are within 
the moderate range. 

A(i6) 

[52] Error may also occur in regard to darkness when the [object’s] distance 
is too great. For when the eye looks from a very great distance at a pure white 
wall in which a black object such as a wall-mirror or a door made up of black 
wood has been set, then, assuming that the beholder had no prior knowledge 
of that wall or those black objects, sight might believe those objects to be 
windows or apertures that lead to dark places and thus take that black colour 
for darkness. 

[53] But if sight perceives a black object as darkness then it will have erred in 
regard to the perceived darkness, and this will be an error in inference since 
darkness is perceptible only by inference. The reason for this error will be that 
the object has fallen outside the moderate range; for an object of this 
description is perceived from a moderate distance to be as it is, sight being able 

lo.sb to perceive black bodies as bodies without mistaking their identity | if the 
other properties in those objects are within the moderate range. 

A(i7) 

[54] Error may also occur in regard to beauty when the object’s distance falls 
outside the moderate range. For assume that an object whose form is beautiful 
has certain marks, wrinkles, pores, flecks, roughness or other minute features 
that reduce its beauty and mar its form; the form of such an object will appear 
beautiful from a distance at which these marks or minute features disappear, 
provided that this distance is not excessively great. Now the distance at which 
the minute features of an object cease to be visible is one that falls outside the 
moderate range for that object, since the moderate distance for a given object 
is that at which all properties of the object are visible so that the object is 
perceived to be as it is. 

[55] But if sight perceives as being beautiful an object which is not so, by 
failing to perceive the features that mar and reduce the beauty of its form, and 
by being sure of the object’s beauty while its minute features are invisible, then 
it will have erred in what it perceives of the object’s beauty; this will be an 
error in inference because beauty is perceptible only by inference and because 

109a this error | is a result of sight’s reliance on the object’s apparent properties 
alone and its acceptance of their conclusions. The cause of this error will be 


III. 7 301 

that the distance of the object has exceeded the moderate range; for when such 
an object is at a moderate distance relative to it, sight will not perceive its form 
as being beautiful, provided that the other properties of that object are in the 
moderate range. 

A(i8) 

[56] Error may also occur in regard to ugliness when the object’s distance 
exceeds the moderate range. For suppose that the colour or shape or figure ot 
an object is not beautiful, or that none of them is; suppose further that there 
exist in the object certain beautiful designs, lines, small parts and other minute 
features on account of which the object can look beautiful; sight will perceive 
such an object to be undoubtedly ugly when looking at it from an excessively 
great distance from which those minute and beautifying features will cease to 

m 109b be visible, | provided that [the beholder has] no prior knowledge of the 
beautiful features in that object. 

[57] But if sight perceives a beautiful object to be ugly without inspecting all 
the object’s properties or doubting its ugliness then it will have erred in what it 
perceives of the object’s ugliness. This will be an error in inference since 
ugliness can be perceived only by inference and since it results trom sight’s 
reliance on the apparent properties alone and its acceptance of their conclu- 
sions while the object’s minute features are not visible. The cause of this error 
is that the object’s distance has exceeded the moderate range; for sight will 
perceive the minute features of such an object when looking at it from a 
moderate distance for that object, provided that its other properties are in the 
moderate range. When sight perceives the minute features responsible for the 
beauty of the object’s form then it will perceive the object to be beautiful. 

A(i9) 

[58] Error may also occur in regard to similarity when the object’s distance 
exceeds the moderate range in the manner shown earlier. For suppose that 

ill noa two objects differ in their minute features; | or let their small parts differ in 
shape or position or magnitude or in all these; let the two objects be similar in 
colour or total shape or magnitude or in all these; looking at these two objects 
from a distance at which their differing minute features cease to be visible sight 
will perceive them to be similar and, not being aware of those features in 
respect of which they differ, sight will not doubt their similarity and, 
therefore, will not judge them to be in any way different. The distance at 
which the minute features of an object cease to be visible is one that falls 
outside the range of moderateness for that object. 

[59] But if sight perceives as similar in all respects two objects that differ in 
some respect, and has no doubt about their similarity, then it will have erred in 


302 


Optics 


303 


Ul nob 


I n 1 a 


regard to [the perceived] similarity. This will be an error in inference since 
similarity can be perceived only by inference and since it results from sight's 
reliance on the apparent properties alone and its acceptance of their conclu- 
sions. The cause of this error will be that the object's distance has exceeded the 
moderate range; for when these objects | are at the moderate distances 
appropriate to them, sight will perceive them, their forms and their differ- 
ences in accordance with what they are, and will therefore make no error in 
regard to their similarity or difference if the other properties in those objects 
are within the moderate range. 

A(20) 

[60] Error may also occur in regard to dissimilarity when the object's 
distance falls outside the moderate range. For suppose that two objects which 
are similar in respect to their minute features differ in their colour or shape or 
magnitude or some other manifest properties; sight will perceive these two 
objects as different and judge them to be lacking in any similarity when 
looking at them from a distance at which their common minute features 
disappear while their manifest properties are visible. Sight may assert the 
dissimilarity of the two objects with confidence if it fails to perceive their 
common features while perceiving at the same time the properties in which 
they differ. The distance at which there disappear the minute features through 
which | the true form of the object may be perceived is one that falls outside 
the moderate range for that object. 

[61] But if sight perceives as dissimilar in all respects two objects which are 
similar in one respect, and if it has no awareness of any similarity between 
them and no doubt about their difference, then it will have erred in what it 
perceives of their dissimilarity. And error in regard to dissimilarity is error in 
inference, since dissimilarity can be perceived only by inference and since this 
error arises from sight’s relying on the manifest properties alone and its 
acceptance of their conclusions. The cause of this error will be that the object's 
distance has exceeded the moderate range; for when looking at such objects 
from moderate distances sight will perceive their similarity and their forms 
according to what they are and not mistake their [degree of] similarity or 
difference, provided that their other properties are in the moderate range. 

[62] It is in these and similar ways that the errors of sight in inference may 
occur when the distances of objects fall outside the moderate range. 


III. 7 

B. Errors of sight in inference 
when the position of the visible object 
falls outside the moderate range 

B(i) 

11 mb [63] [The following is] how sight may err in inference | relating to distance 

when the position of the object falls outside the moderate range. Suppose that 
two objects stand on the ground and in the same line with the eye; let one of 
them conceal part of the other and let the eye see them both but not the surface 
of the ground between them, because it is screened by the front object; sight 
will perceive these two objects as contiguous or close to one another and will 
not sense the distance between them if the beholder had no prior knowledge of 
them and if he did not previously see the distance between them, though the 
farther object may be moderately far from and not very close to the eye. 

[64] But if sight perceives two objects at a distance from one another to be 
contiguous or close to one another then it will have erred in what it perceives 
of the distance of the farther object. This will be an error in inference since 
distance is perceptible by inference; and the cause of this error will be that the 

a 1 1 Ha position of the distance between j those two objects has fallen outside the 

moderate range by being extended along the lines of the ray that extends to 
those objects. For if the interval between two such objects cuts across the lines 
of the ray, sight will be able to perceive that interval and the magnitude of the 
distance of each of the two objects [from the eye], provided that the other 
properties in the objects are in the moderate range. 

B(2) 

[65] Error may also occur in regard to the position of an object when that 
position falls outside the moderate range. For suppose that the object is small 
and at a distance from the radial axis; let the eye gaze at another object on 
which the radial axis falls; let the object that is distant from the axis be slightly 
inclined to the frontal direction, i.e. let the object’s surface be inclined to the 

ni 112b line imagined to be drawn from that surface to the common axis] and 
perpendicular to it, this inclination being not excessive. Sight will neither be 
able to perceive the obliquity of such an object, nor tell whether the position of 
an object is oblique or frontal, if the object is small and lies at a distance from 
the radial axis. For sight cannot achieve ascertained perception of the form of 
an object at a distance from the radial axis, not being able to contemplate such 
an object or discern the position of its surfaces. Further, the transverse line that 
defines the frontal direction is not normally visible and in this case not 
available to sight for the purpose of determining the position of the object’s 
surface by reference to it. And if sight cannot ascertain the form of an object or 


304 


Optics 


305 


find a manifest sign by means of which it can determine the position of the 
object’s surface at the time [of perception], and if the object’s inclination to the 
frontal direction at that time is not excessive, then sight will perceive the 
object to be in the frontal direction and fail to distinguish between its position 
and the position of objects it perceives to be in the frontal direction. | The 
reason is that sight can perceive the position of slightly inclined objects only 
by ascertaining their forms and by thoroughly contemplating them; but sight 
cannot achieve ascertained perception of an object outside the radial axis while 
it fixates on and contemplates another object. 

[66] But if, perceiving an object that is inclined to the frontal direction, sight 
fails to distinguish that direction from frontalitv, then it will have erred in 
regard to position. This will be an error in inference since position is 
perceptible by inference. The cause of this error will be that the object’s 
position has fallen outside the moderate range; for the position of an object 
lying opposite the middle of the eye, and on the radial axis or close to it, will be 
perceived to be as it is, provided that the other properties in that object are in 
the moderate range. 

B(3) 

[67] Error may also occur in regard to the shape of an object when the 
object’s position falls outside the moderate range. For consider a round and 
concave object, such as a bowl | or cup or kettle or the like, the plane of whose 
round edge is excessively inclined to the radial lines; let the larger part of that 
object be concealed from view; let the object lie outside the radial axis and let 
the latter fall on another object at which the beholder gazes; and assume that 
the beholder had no prior knowledge of what the object is and no previous 
perception of its round shape; upon noticing such a concave round shape sight 
will perceive it as being oblong if it is not very close to the eye. And in the 
absence of prior knowledge of the object’s rotundity sight will have no doubt 
about this elongation. 

[68] Again, when the top surfaces of four-edged objects, such as square 
basins or chests, are excessively inclined to the radial lines, while not being 
directly opposite the middle of the eye, | sight will perceive them as oblong, 
even when they are moderately far from, though not close to the eye. 

[69] The reason for this has already been stated, namely: that sight cannot 
ascertain the degree 1 of inclination of an excessively oblique object even from 
a moderate distance at which it is capable of identifying the object when in a 
different position, and that sight cannot ascertain the form of an object that lies 
outside the radial axis. And if sight cannot ascertain the degree 1 of the object’s 
inclination then it will not truly perceive the size of the object’s inclined 
breadth and, consequently, will perceive that breadth to be shorter than it is. 


III. 7 

Sight will, however, perceive the true size of the object’s frontal length; 
therefore, as a result of this difference in size between the object’s length and 
breadth sight will perceive a round or square object as being oblong; if the 
object is rectangular sight will perceive it to be more or less elongated than it is 

ill 114b according as | the object’s breadth or length is inclined; or it will perceive the 
object to be of equal sides if the difference between its breadth and length is 
small. 

[70] But if sight perceives the shape of an object to be other than it is then it 
will have erred in regard to the object’s shape, and this will be an error in 
inference since shape is perceptible by inference. The cause of this error will be 
that the object’s position has fallen outside the moderate range; for when the 
round or square aspect of such objects frontally faces the eye, or is close to 
frontality, sight will perceive their true shapes provided the remaining 
properties of those objects are within the moderate range. As well as being an 
error in regard to shape this is an error in regard to size, for sight perceives a 
round or square object to be oblong, in the manner we have described, only 
because it perceives the object’s breadth to be smaller than its real size; and 

ni ri. sa this | is an error in regard to the object’s size. 

B(4) 

[71] Error may also occur in regard to size when the object’s position falls 
outside the moderate range in another way. For let the eye perceive a 
succession of objects of equal [height] that stand in the same line on the 
ground; let the eye be in line with these objects but at a higher point; assume 
that the observer has no prior knowledge of the equality of these objects, not 
having previously perceived them or ascertained their magnitude; sight will 
immediately perceive them to be of unequal magnitudes; each of them will 
appear larger than the one before it, and the farthest will appear larger than the 
rest. For, under these conditions, each of the objects will conceal part of the 
one behind it, and the radial line that extends to the top 1 of the second object 

in 115b will be higher than the line extending to the top of the first. Similarly, | the 
radial line that extends to the top of the third object will be higher than that 
which extends to the top of the second. Now it was shown earlier that sight 
perceives the directions of radial lines; 2 therefore, when sight perceives these 
objects it will take the farther ones among them to be higher than those before 
them. But it is usually the case with unequal objects standing on the ground 
that the larger ones among them are higher than the smaller ones. When, 
therefore, sight perceives such objects in the manner we described, and some 
of them appear higher than the others, it will in the absence of prior 
knowledge of their equality take the higher ones to be larger, even though 
they may be at moderate distances from it. 



Optics 


307 


306 

[72] But if sight perceives equal objects to be of unequal magnitudes then it 
will have erred in regard to their size, and this will be an error in inference. The 
reason why this error in inference occurred is that the radial lines drawn to the 

1 6a tops of those objects have different positions, | and that the faculty of 

judgement immediately relied on the premiss that what is higher is larger, 
which is false if taken universally. The reason why this occurred is that the 
position of those objects was outside the moderate range. 

[73] The moderate position at which sight can perceive the equality or 
inequality of objects standing on the ground, if they are in the same line with 
the eye, is that in which the eye lies on the straight line drawn from the top of 
the first object parallel to the ground-surface on which these objects stand. 
Assuming that the surface is plane and that the eye lies on the line passing 
through the top of the first object and parallel to that surface, sight will 
truthfully perceive that object to be equal to the other objects behind it, and, if 
they are not equal to it, sight will perceive the amount by which one of them 

1 6b exceeds | the other and thus truly perceive the difference between their 

magnitudes. For let the eye be situated on the line parallel to the ground- 
surface and passing through the top of the first object; this will be the radial 
line drawn from the eye to the top of the first object; it will also be the line that 
extends to the tops of the other objects lying behind the first object if these 
objects are equal to one another. But if a single radial line extends to the tops of 
all objects that succeed one another in the same line on the ground-surface, 
sight will perceive those objects as being of equal height; consequently it will 
perceive them as being of equal magnitude, and this perception of their 
equality will be true. If these objects are not equal in magnitude, the radial 
lines drawn to their tops will be of various positions, some being higher than 
others, and the first object will screen from each of them a magnitude equal to 
itself. And if the radial lines drawn to the tops of those objects have different 

17a positions, sight will perceive | the heights and magnitudes of those objects to 
be unequal. And if the first object screens part of every one of the objects 
behind it, sight will perceive the amount by which each of these objects 
exceeds the first according to the visible excess in magnitude; this will be a true 
perception of the difference in magnitude between these objects and of the 
amount of that difference. 

[74] Therefore, assuming that [a number of] equal objects successively 
stand one after another in the same line on the surface of the ground, and 
assuming the eye to be situated at a point higher than those objects, sight will 
erroneously regard them as unequal in size because their position falls outside 
the moderate range. For the moderate position of such objects in relation to 
the eye that views them, namely the position in which their equality can be 
truly perceived by comparing them to one another, is that in which the eye is 


HI. 7 

situated on the line that passes through the top of the first object parallel to the 
ground-surface. 

B(5) 

[75] Error may also occur in regard to separation when the position of the 
u ll7 b object exceeds the moderate range. | For let the eye view some wooden boards 

or doors whose surfaces are excessively inclined to the radial lines, and let 
these surfaces have black or dark-coloured lines; if sight has no prior know- 
ledge of these lines it might take them to be ruptures in those bodies, even if 
they are at a moderate distance from which they can be truly perceived when 
they are in a different position and not very close to the eye. For when the 
surface of an object is excessively inclined to the radial lines, the lines and other 
features in it will not appear as they are. And, therefore, when the surfaces of 
wooden boards and doors are excessively inclined to the radial lines, sight will 
not be able to achieve true perception of their features and lines. And if sight 
niiisa cannot truly perceive the features | that may exist in the surfaces of those 
bodies, then it will not be able to discriminate between the lines that exist in 
them and the ruptures or separations, provided that these lines are black or of a 
dark colour and that the beholder had no prior knowledge of them. 

[76] The cause of this error is that the position of these objects falls outside 
the moderate range; for when their surfaces frontally face the eye or are close 
to frontality, sight will achieve ascertained perception of their features from 
that same distance, provided that the distance is moderate and that the other 
properties in those bodies are within the moderate range, and will therefore 
perceive their features and lines and make no mistake in regard to any of them. 

B(6) 

[77] Error may also occur in regard to continuity when the position of the 
object falls outside the moderate range. For suppose that the eye looks at [two] 

ill 1 1 8b walls whose surfaces stand | on the ground in one line; let these surfaces extend 

along the lines of the ray; let them be separated from one another and let their 
separation be narrow; sight will perceive these walls to be continuous with 
one another and will not sense their separation. For since the width of 
separation is situated along the radial lines sight will not perceive the space 
between the walls as a result of this width being concealed by the first wall that 
lies close to the eye, whose surface is in line with the radial line and the width 
of the separation. Again, if the second wall sticks out of the line on which the 
first wall stands sight will perceive a corner at the second wall where it is 
separated from the first; sight will not therefore sense the separation between 
the walls if the surface of the first wall and the width of the separation lie along 
the lines of the ray. 


f 


Optics 


III 120b 


309 


308 

[78] But if sight perceives separate objects as being continuous with one 
another then it will have erred in regard to their continuity; and this will be an 

19a error in inference | since continuity is perceptible by inference. The cause of 
this error is that the position of the object falls outside the range of moderate- 
ness; for when such walls are so situated that the gaps between them frontally 
face the eye, or when they are close to frontality, sight will perceive their 
separation, provided that the other properties in those objects are in the 
moderate range. 

B(7) 

[79] Error may also occur in regard to number when the position of the 

I object falls outside the moderate range. This is evident in the case of objects 

perceived with both eyes when the rays going out to each of them from the 
two eyes 1 are differently situated in respect to direction, as was shown with 
reference to the objects attached to the previously described board when the 
eye fixates on the object in the middle of the board. 2 It was shown that when 
any of these objects lies outside and at a distance from the transverse line at the 
| middle of the board, it will be seen double. Therefore if a number of objects 

19b are fixed on the board | outside the transverse line, each of them will be seen 
double. Similarly: let the eye gaze at an object on the surface of the ground; let 
there be other objects between the eye and that object and let them be close to 
the eye, or let the fixated object be raised above the ground-surface; and 
suppose that other objects exist behind and at a distance from that [fixated] 
object; sight will perceive each of the closer and farther objects double. 

[80] But if, in the absence of prior knowledge of these objects, sight 
perceives them to be twice as many as they are, then it will have erred in regard 
to their number. And error in regard to number is error in inference since 
number is perceptible by inference. The cause of this error is that the positions 
of these objects fall outside the moderate range by not being similarly 

20a situated | in relation to both eyes and because the rays drawn to them from the 
two eyes are not similarly situated. For when similarly situated rays meet on 
such objects sight perceives their true number, provided that the other 
properties in those objects are in the moderate range. 

B(8) 

[81] Error may also occur in regard to motion when the position of the object 
falls outside the moderate range. Let the observer be in a ship which is being 
driven fast by the current of a river; let the river banks or one of them be so 
close that the [observer’s] eyes can see what is on them; let the observer look at 
the ship, gazing at some object in it, while also looking at the trees or palms or 
walls which he can see on the river bank; he will see all objects on the bank 


III. 7 

(palms and trees and walls and the rest) as if they had | a continuous motion in 
the direction opposite to that of the ship’s motion. 

[82] But if sight perceives a stationary object to be in motion then it will 
have erred in regard to the perceived motion of the object. And this will be an 
error in inference since motion is perceived by inference. The cause of this 
error is that the position of those objects was outside the moderate range by 
being far from the radial axis when the observer gazed at something inside the 
ship; for when the observer turns to face those apparently moving objects, and 
the radial axis moves over them, he will perceive the objects in front of him as 
stationary, provided that the other properties in these objects are in the 
moderate range. 

B(9) 

[83] Error may also occur in regard to rest when the object’s position falls 
outside the moderate range. Let the observer gaze at an object on which the 
radial axis falls; let him at the same time see a turning millstone which lies 

hi uia outside the radial axis and at j some distance from it; sight will not perceive 
this millstone as in motion but rather perceive it to be stationary. For if the 
millstone is moving fast and its form is regular, sight will be unable to detect 
its motion and the succession of its parts except by contemplation and 
inspection. But if the stone lies outside the radial axis sight will not be able to 
contemplate its motion while gazing at and contemplating another object; 
neither the form of the stone nor its motion will in this case be manifest to the 
eye, nor will the succession of its parts be visible. And if the true form and 
features of the millstone are not manifest to the eye, then sight will not 
immediately perceive its motion; sight will therefore believe the turning 
millstone to be stationary. 

[84] But if sight perceives a moving body as being stationary then it will 
in 12 ib have erred in what it perceives | as the object’s rest. This will be an error in 

inference because rest is perceived by inference. The cause of this error is that 
the position of the object falls outside the moderate range; for if the millstone 
lies [directly] opposite the middle of the eye, and the radial axis moves over it, 
sight will be able to perceive its motion, provided that the other properties of 
it are in the moderate range. 

B(io) 

[85] Error may also occur in regard to roughness of an object’s surface when 
the position of the object falls outside the moderate range. For when painted 
pictures 1 (such as those described in the preceding chapter) 2 are pictures of 
rough-surfaced objects although they themselves are polished, sight will 
perceive them to be rough in spite of their smoothness or polishedness, unless 


3io 


Optics 


their position is such that the light is reflected to the eye, thereby revealing 
their polished surface 3 — even though these pictures may be close to the eye 
and at a distance from which their polishedness or smoothness would be 
perceptible when they are in a moderate position. If the picture is in the 
position in which the light is reflected to the eye, and it is near the eye, its 

1 122a polishedness will be visible and no | error in regard to its roughness will occur. 

But the position in which the light will be reflected to the eye is the moderate 
position for perceiving the polishedness of the object’s surface. 4 And the 
position in which the light fails to be reflected to the eye is one that falls outside 
the range of moderateness for perceiving polishedness. So if the picture’s 
position is that in which the light is not reflected to the eye and in which the 
picture’s polishedness does not appear, and assuming the picture to be of a 
rough-surfaced object, sight will perceive it to be rough (in spite of its 
polishedness or smoothness) at a distance from which sight is able to perceive 
its polishedness or smoothness when it is in a moderate position. Sight will 
not perceive the polishedness or smoothness of such a picture unless it is close 
to the eye and, moreover, in a position in which the light is reflected to the eye. 
If the viewer is not acquainted with the art of painting and had no prior 
knowledge of the picture’s smoothness he will have no doubt regarding its 
roughness. 

[86] But if sight perceives a smooth object to be rough then it will have 
erred in the roughness perceived. And error in regard to roughness is error in 
inference because roughness is perceived by inference. The cause of this error 

I r 22b is that the position of the object has fallen outside the moderate range; | for if 
the viewer changes the position of the surface of such a picture so that the form 
[of it] is reflected to the eye, and if the picture is also close to the eye, and the 
other properties in it that are necessary for perceiving visible objects as they 
are fall within the moderate range, sight will perceive its smoothness or 
polishedness as it is and will not erroneously regard it as rough. 

B(i 1) 

[87] Error may also occur in regard to smoothness when the position of the 
object falls outside the moderate range. For let an object whose surface is 
slightly rough be situated outside the radial axis and at some distance from it; 
let the eye look at another object on which the radial axis falls while yet 
perceiving the rough object; sight will perceive such an object to be smooth 
provided that the observer had no prior knowledge of the object’s roughness. 
For sight cannot have a true perception of an object when the latter is far from 
the radial axis, nor is sight able to contemplate an object while gazing at 

1 123a another. But slight roughness [ can be perceived only by contemplating and 
ascertaining the form of the object’s surface. So if the form of the surface is 


HI. 7 311 

unclear sight will not perceive the slight roughness of that surface, nor will it 
perceive the true form of the light that exists in the surface nor discern the 
difference between this form and the light that is perceptible in smooth 
surfaces (because of their close similarity), provided that the roughness of the 
surface is slight and that the form is unclear as a result of being outside the 
radial axis and at a distance from it. 

[88] Now if sight fails to perceive the roughness in the surface of an object 
then it will believe it to be smooth; and if it perceives the rough surface to be 
smooth then it will have erred in regard to the smoothness perceived; and this 
will be an error in inference because smoothness is perceptible [only] by 
inference. The cause of this inference is that the position ofthe object has fallen 
outside the moderate range; for if such an object lies [directly] opposite the 
middle of the eye, and the radial axis moves over its surface, sight will truly 

ill 123b perceive it to be smooth, provided that the other properties | in it are in the 
moderate range. 

B(i2-i3) 

[89] Error may also occur in regard to transparency and opacity when the 
position of the object lies outside the moderate range. For transparent vessels 
containing a beverage with a strong colour will appear to be opaque if no 
strong light exists behind them. When the observer looks through one of these 
vessels at a strong light that reaches the vessel in lines perpendicular to its 
surface, the transparency of the vessel will be clearly visible as a result of being 
penetrated by the light. If the light is situated in such a way that it shines on the 
vessels in lines oblique to its surface then that light will either not be visible or 
have a faint appearance behind the vessel. If such an object is viewed in this 
way when the light behind it is inclined to it, sight will perceive it to be less 
transparent than it is. But if sight perceives an object’s transparency to be less 

in 124a than its real transparency | then it will have erred in regard to the object’s 
transparency. 

[90] Again, if the observer looks through one of the vessels when the light 
behind it is not very strong and also is excessively inclined to the vessel, that 
light will not in most cases be visible and, therefore, sight will not perceive the 
transparency of such an object. Assuming that the observer had no prior 
knowledge of the transparency of the beverage in that vessel he will not doubt 
its opacity, believing the beverage of which he had no prior knowledge to be a 
non-transparent liquid body. 

[91] But if sight perceives the transparent beverage to be opaque then it will 
have erred in regarding it as opaque. These two errors in regard to both 
transparency and opacity will be errors in inference because transparency and 
opacity are perceptible by inference. The cause of these two errors is that the 


r 


312 


Optics 


3U 


object’s position has fallen outside the moderate range; for when there lies 
1 124b behind such objects a strong light that shines | upon them in lines perpendicu- 
lar to their surfaces, or in lines close to the perpendiculars and not excessively 
oblique, sight will perceive their transparency as it is. Now the moderate 
position in which the transparency of these objects is perceptible as it is is that 
in which one of these bodies intervenes between the eye and the light in such a 
way that the light penetrating it and appearing behind it reaches its surface 
along perpendicular lines, while lines surrounding these are only slightly 
inclined. Any other position is one that falls outside the range of moderateness 
for perceiving the transparency of these objects. 

B(i4) 

[92] Error may also occur in regard to shadow when the object’s position 
falls outside the moderate range. For consider a pure white object, such as a 
whitewashed wall, in which there are some earth-coloured areas, and suppose 
1 125a that the sun shines on the whole of this wall; let the eye look at an object | 
outside this wall and at some distance from it; the radial axis will fall on this 
object as the eye gazes at it and contemplates it; and let the wall and the 
' earth-coloured 1 areas on it, though perceptible, be at some distance from the 

axis; sight will perceive those earth-coloured places to be shadows. Assuming 
that the beholder had no prior knowledge of that wall or those places and that 
he had not previously perceived that wall, he may believe those earth- or 
dark-coloured 2 areas to be shadows. For an object outside the radial axis 
cannot be truly perceived. And when light shines upon multi-coloured objects 
its form will not be the same [in all of them]; and so when the sun shines upon 
that wall, the light that occurs in the pure white areas will be strongly radiant 
1 125b whereas that which occurs in the earth[-coloured] areas | will be dark and 
similar to shadow. Looking at such an object when it is outside the radial axis 
and distant from it, sight will perceive the form of the light that is in it to be 
varied; it will perceive the pure white areas to be strongly radiant and the 
earthy ones to be darker. Now sight is accustomed to [perceiving] shadows 
interspersed with light; and so when it perceives the dark and earthy areas 
without ascertaining their form because of their being outside the radial axis 
and without prior knowledge of what they are, it may believe them to be 
shadows. 

[93l But if sight perceives an illuminated and unshaded area to be shaded 
then it will have erred in regard to the perceived shadow. And error in regard 
to shadow is an error in inference because shadow is perceived by inference. 
The cause of this error is that the object’s position has fallen outside the 
moderate range; for, when that same object lies opposite the eye, and the 
126a radial axis | moves over it, sight will perceive it to be as it is and perceive its 


III. 7 

light to be as it is and will not perceive the object to be shadowed, provided 
that the other properties in it are in the moderate range. 

B(i5) 

[94] Again, let the wall be in the same position and let it be pure white; let 
there be some black areas or bodies (such as wall mirrors 1 ) in it and let the light 
on this wall be moderate and not the direct light of the sun; sight may take 
these black areas or bodies to be openings or windows leading to dark places, 
if the beholder had no prior knowledge of those black bodies. 

[95] But if the perceiver 1 believes these black and solid bodies to be unlit 
openings or windows then it will have erred in believing them to be darkness , 
and this will be an error in inference because darkness is perceived by 
inference. The cause of this error is that the object’s position has fallen outside 

in 126b the moderate range; for when such an object lies opposite | the eye, and the 
radial axis moves over its surface, sight will perceive those black bodies in it to 
be what they are and will not believe them to be unlighted places, provided 
that the other properties in that object are in the moderate range. 

B(i6) 

[96] Error may also occur in regard to beauty when the object’s position falls 
outside the moderate range. For suppose that in an object whose manifest 
features are beautiful there exist some minute features that mar them and 
detract from their beauty and thus make them ugly (examples of these features 
are the spots or freckles in human beings or the nap and roughness in smooth 
cloth, and the like); let this object lie outside the radial axis and at some 
distance from it; let the axis fall on another object at which the eye gazes while 
also looking at the beautiful object with its minute ugly features; sight will 
perceive this object to be beautiful and free from any marring features. For 
sight will not be able to achieve true perception of the object in the position we 

in 127a have described and, therefore, | will not perceive its minute marring and 
uglifying features. And if it fails to perceive the features that make the object 
ugly while perceiving those manifest features that make it beautiful then it will 
take the object to be beautiful and have no doubt about its beauty and no 
awareness of its ugliness. 

[97] But if sight perceives as being beautiful an object whose form is ugly 
then it will have erred in regard to the object’s beauty. This will be an error in 
inference because beauty is perceptible by inference and because this error 
arises from sight’s being satisfied with the manifest premisses and its accept- 
ance of their conclusions. The cause of this error is that the object’s position 
has has fallen outside the moderate range; for when such an object is [directly] 
opposite the middle of the eye and the radial axis moves over its surface, sight 


314 


Optics 


will have true perception of it and truly perceive all the features that detract 
from the beauty of its form, provided that the other properties in the object are 
within the moderate range. 

B(i7) 

III 127b [98] Error may also occur in regard to ugliness when | the object’s position 

falls outside the moderate range. For let the engraved designs in some stones 
or walls or doors be beautiful but let the colours and shapes of these bodies be 
not beautiful; if sight looks at some such objects when their surfaces are 
excessively inclined to the radial lines it will perceive their shapes and colours 
but not their designs. And [even] if it perceives something of the outline of 
their designs it will not perceive them to be as they are or ascertain their 
details, 1 assuming that the designs are engraved 2 and that the object’s surface 
is very oblique. But if sight does not perceive the beautiful designs in virtue of 
which it judges such objects to be beautiful, or if it does not acquire of the 
beautiful designs a distinct perception through which it comprehends their 
details, 1 then it will not perceive the beauty of these objects although it is able 
to perceive their ugly colours and shapes. And if sight perceives the ugly 
features of the object while failing to perceive its beautiful features then it will 
perceive it to be ugly. 3 

in 128a [99] But if sight perceives | a beautiful object to be ugly then it will have 

erred in regard to its ugliness; and this will be an error in inference because 
ugliness is perceived by inference and because this error arises from sight’s 
being satisfied with the manifest premisses and its acceptance of their conclu- 
sions. The cause of this error is that the object’s position has fallen outside the 
moderate range; for when such an object faces the eye sight will perceive the 
designs on it to be as they are and thus perceive the object’s beautiful features 
and, therefore, will not doubt the beauty of the object, provided that the other 
properties in that object are in the moderate range. 

B(i8) 

[100] Error may also occur in regard to similarity when the object’s position 
falls outside the moderate range. For visible objects may be similar in certain 
manifest properties such as colour or shape or figure or type, while differing in 
some of their subtle features — as, for example, in the case of varieties of 
cloths, draperies, vessels or utensils. For cloths may differ in their weaves or in 
the designs and decorative features 1 skilfully worked into them by their 
makers, while being similar in type or colour. Similarly, draperies, vessels 

[1 128b and utensils | may be similar in type or colour or shape or figure while 
differing in their designs and embellishments. 2 Let the eye look at two such 
objects; let them be of the same type and similar in colour, shape and figure. 


315 


III. 7 

while differing in the subtle features we have described; let both objects lie 
outside the radial axis and at some distance from it while being close to one 
another; and let the eye gaze at another object in the manner repeatedly 
described. The sight will perceive of these two objects those manifest 
properties in which they resemble one another, but will not perceive or sense 
the subtle ones in which they differ, because it cannot acquire a distinct 
perception of the form of the object while the latter is in the position we have 
described. And if sight perceives the similarity of two objects in respect of 
their manifest properties, without perceiving any of their differentiating 
features, then it will perceive the objects to be similar and, therefore, judge 
them to be similar in all respects and attribute no difference to them, if the 
m 129a beholder had no prior knowledge | of their differentiating features. 

[101] But if sight perceives two different objects as being similar and fails to 
sense any difference between them or doubt their similarity, then it will have 
erred in regard to their similarity. And this will be an error in inference 
because similarity is perceived by inference and because of sight’s being 
satisfied with the manifest premisses and its acceptance of their conclusions. 
The cause of this error is that the object’s position has fallen outside the 
moderate range; for when two such objects are [directly] opposite the middle 
of the eye and the radial axis moves over them, sight will perceive them to be 
different as a result of perceiving their subtle features, and will not therefore 
err in regard to the difference between these two objects, provided that the 
other properties in them are in the moderate range. 

B(i9) 

[102] And it is in this same manner that error may occur in regard to 
dissimilarity when the two objects differ in their manifest properties while 
being similar in their subtle features and sight perceives them while they are in 
the position we have described. 

in 129b [103] It is in these and similar ways that sight errs | in inference when the 

positions of the visible objects fall outside the moderate range. 

C. Errors of sight in inference 
when the illumination in the visible object 
falls outside the moderate range 

C(I) 

[104] The following is an example of how sight may err in inference when 
the light in the object falls outside the moderate range. In the darkness of 
night, let two men (on horseback or on foot), or two beasts, pass on two 


316 


Optics 


317 


transverse lines in front of the eye ; 1 let one of them be behind the other with a 
fair and moderate distance between them; let one of them be closer to the eye 
than the other but with no great difference between their distances [from the 
eye]; looking at two such individuals in the darkness of night sight will 
perceive the separation between them according to how far one of them lies 
behind the other; it will perceive them as if they moved on one and the same 
transverse line and, therefore, fail to perceive the difference between their 
distances [from the eye], provided that the nearer of the two objects is not very 
close to the eye. The reason is that sight can perceive the difference between 
the distances of visible objects only if it perceives the magnitudes of those 
oa distances and the amount by which they exceed one | another and if the 
distances are not dissimilar. But sight can perceive the magnitudes of the 
distances of objects only if these distances extend along a succession of 
continuous bodies and if sight perceives these bodies and their magnitudes. 
When sight perceives those bodies in the darkness of night it will not be able to 
perceive truly the surface of the ground between them, nor will it be able to 
ascertain its magnitude in the dark. That being so, sight, being unable to 
ascertain the magnitude of the interval between the eye and those two objects, 
will not perceive the amount by which the distance of one of them exceeds that 
of the other and will therefore fail to perceive the difference between their 
distances. Sight will therefore believe that those two objects move on the same 
transverse interval, that they are equidistant from itself, or that there is no 
appreciable difference between their distances, thus failing to differentiate 
between the distances of the farther and the nearer object, 
ob [105] But if sight perceives two unequally distant objects to be equidistant, | 

then it errs in regard to the distance of both or of one of them and in regard to 
the equality of their distances. This is an error in inference because distance 
and equidistance are perceptible by inference. The cause of this error is that the 
light in the object has fallen outside the moderate range by falling far short of 
it. For, although dark at night, the surface of the ground when exposed to the 
sky is not completely dark but has a little light in it; only places screened from 
the sky, such as the interiors of buildings or caves, are completely dark; 
whereas places exposed to the sky get a little light from it and from the stars. 
Thus when, in the darkness of night, sight looks at the two objects we 
described, it will perceive them without perceiving the difference between 
their distances because it does not perceive or ascertain the size of the ground 
surface between them and the eye on account of the excessively small amount 
i a of light on the ground. It will perceive those two individuals | only on account 

of their separation and because the sky will be visible behind them. Looking, 
however, at these two objects in daylight, the farther of them being at a 
moderate distance, sight will perceive the distance of each of them from the 


III. 7 

eye and the difference between their distances, and thus will make no error 
regarding their distances, provided that the remaining conditions for perceiv- 
ing visible objects as they are fall within the moderate range. 

C(2) 

[106] Error may also occur in regard to an object’s position when the light in 
the object falls outside the moderate range. For assuming the visible object to 
be in a very obscure place in which only a little light exists, and assuming that 
the object is small and that its surface is not excessively inclined to the radial 
lines, sight will perceive the object to be frontally facing the eye and not 
obliquely. For when the eye looks at an object in a very obscure place sight 

in 131b will not correctly perceive | its form. If in addition, the object is small and only 
a little light exists in its dark surface, the sight will only perceive of it a certain 
darkness, neither discerning the object’s position nor sensing its inclination, 
but only perceiving it to be opposite the eye. The sight will therefore perceive 
the object just as it would a frontally oriented object and fail to discriminate 
between the two. And if it fails to distinguish between the position of an 
oblique object and that of a frontal object then it errs in regard to position. 

C(3) 

[107] Similarly: let the eye view a many-sided object in an obscure place or 
in the darkness of night, and let the object be small but of equal dimensions: 
sight will perceive it to be round without sensing its angles and sides. For the 
angles of a small object with many sides are small, and if the light in such an 
object is not strong, sight will not be able to detect the angles although the 

m 132a object as a whole will not cease to be visible | on this account. And since 
extremely small objects are not detectable in obscure places in which fairly 
large objects are visible, an object with small angles and equal dimensions will 
appear in very obscure places to be round, and sight will fail to sense its sides 
and angles. 

[108] Again, if the surface of the object is spherical, or if it is slightly convex 
(whatever the shape of its convexity) or slightly concave, and it is viewed in a 
very dark place or in the darkness of night, the eye will perceive it to be flat and 
fail to sense its convexity or concavity, provided that these are slight and that 
the place is very dark. 

[109] But if sight perceives a polygonal object to be round or a convex or 
concave object to be flat then it will have erred in regard to the object’s shape. 
Errors in regard to the position or shape or figure of surfaces are errors in 

in 132b inference | because these properties are perceived by inference. The cause of 
these errors is that the light in the object has fallen outside the moderate range; 
for if the light in oblique or polygonal or convex or concave objects is strong. 


Optics 


3i9 


318 

sight will perceive their position and shape and figure as they are, provided 
that the other properties in them are in the moderate range. 

C(4) 

[no] Error may also occur in regard to size when the light in the object falls 
outside the moderate range. In the darkness of night, let the eye view an erect 
object, such as a palm or tree or wall, behind which a mountain or wall stands; 
let the object be closer to the eye than to the mountain or wall, and let a fairly 
large distance exist between the object and the mountain or wall; sight will 
perceive that object in the dark as if it were within or contiguous to that 
mountain or wall. For sight will not be able in the dark to perceive the distance 
between the object and the mountain or wall standing behind it. And since the 
133* object is closer to the eye than to the mountain | or wall, sight will perceive the 
tip 1 of that object to be in line with a point near the top of the mountain or wall 
— either its summit or a point close to it; the point perceived on the mountain 
or wall together with the tip of that object will [appear to] be higher than the 
object and may [appear to] be many times higher than the object’s length, in 
proportion to the distance between them. If sight perceives the tip of the 
object together with the top of the mountain or wall (or together with any 
point on these two), while believing the object to be close or adjacent to the 
mountain or wall, then it will take the object to be equal in length to the height 
of the point on the mountain or wall with which the object’s tip is aligned. 
Sight may even perceive the object’s top as being higher than the summit of 
the mountain or wall and consequently believe the object to be taller [than it 

is]. 

[111] But if sight believes this object to be equal in length to the visible 
mountain or wall that stands behind the object and at a fairly large distance 
from it, then sight will have erred in regard to the magnitude of the object’s 

133b length or the mountain’s (or wall’s) height. This will be | an error in inference 
because magnitude is perceived by inference. The cause of this error is that the 
light on that object and on that mountain or wall has fallen outside the 
moderate range by being too little; for in daylight the height of a similar 
object, or of a mountain or wall, and the interval between them will all be 
correctly perceived as they are, provided that the other properties of these 
objects are in the moderate range. 

C(5-7) 

[112] Error may also occur in regard to separation when the light in the 
object falls outside the moderate range. When a carpenter wants to cut a piece 
of timber into planks he draws on it straight lines in black where he wants to 
cut; once cut, the timber will be split through where the lines are. If such an 


III. 7 

object is viewed in the dark before it is split but with those lines drawn on it, 
and the beholder has no prior knowledge of it, sight will believe that the black 
lines | are separations or cleavages, and that the timber is a collection of planks 
that have been split and stacked together, for carpenters are in the habit of not 
removing or separating the planks which they have cut until they need them. 
And if sight believes a single and continuous body to be several bodies that 
have been stacked together, thus taking the black lines in such a body to be 
separations, then it will have erred in regard to the separation perceived and 
also in regard to the perceived number of those bodies since it believes them to 
be a collection of bodies when they are in fact one. 

[113] Similarly, viewing a number of objects in a dark place or in the 
darkness of night, these objects being dark and similar to each other in colour 
and narrowly and inconspicuously separated from one another, sight will 
perceive them as a single and continuous body and therefore fail to perceive 
their separation. The reason is that small features and inconspicuous and 

a 134b narrow separations are not visible in | very dark places or at night. And since 
these objects are of dark colours they will appear to be dark as a whole and 
their darkness will not be distinguishable from that of the separation between 
them, which is not manifest. And if sight perceives separate objects as being 
one continuous object then it will have erred in regard to their perceived 
continuity , and also in regard to their number, by taking them to be one when 
they are in fact many. 

[114] Again, let a number of very polished and similarly coloured bodies be 
so closely stacked together that they are narrowly and not manifestly separ- 
ated; let their surfaces be similarly situated and let the light of the sun be 
reflected from their smooth surfaces to the eye viewing them. Sight will not in 
this situation perceive their separation but rather believe them to be a single 

:n 135a and continuous body. For when the object’s surface | is polished and the light 
is reflected from it to the eye, sight does not achieve a correct perception of the 
form of that surface nor perceive its minute features. If the separation between 
these objects is narrow and not manifest, sight will not be able to perceive it on 
account of the reflection of light from the surfaces of these objects to the eye. 
And if sight does not perceive the separation between them then it will believe 
them to be a single continuous body. 

[115] But if sight believes separate but contiguous bodies to constitute a 
single continuous body then it will have erred in regard to the continuity and 
number it perceives in them. And to err in regard to separation or continuity 
or number is to err in inference, because separation and continuity and 
number are perceived by inference. The cause of these errors is that the light in 
these objects has fallen outside the moderate range by being too little or too 

n 135b much; for when the light in the objects we have described is | moderate, sight 


320 


Optics 


321 


will correctly perceive their separation, continuity, number, and all their 
[other] properties, no error will occur in regard to any of these properties, 
provided that the remaining conditions which are necessary for perceiving 
objects as they are fall within the moderate range. 

C(8) 

[116] [Error may also occur in regard to motion on account of deficient 
light.] For, on a dark night, let the eye look at an object standing vertically on 
the surface of the ground; let the object be fixed in front of and not too far from 
a mountain or wall; let the object be seen in line with the top of the mountain 
or wall; then let the observer move towards the mountain or wall on a line 
inclined away from the object, while still looking at the object and the top of 

36a the mountain or wall that is aligned with it. | As the observer continues to 
move in this manner the object will appear to him to shift position until the 
imagined radial line between the object and the eye ceases to extend rec- 
tilinearly to the top of the mountain or wall, and moves away from it. With 
the eye in this position, and still looking at the object and at the top of the 
mountain or wall, a certain gap will be perceived through which the sky will 
appear between the object and the top of the mountain or wall. But, in this 
situation, sight will neither perceive the true distance between the object and 
the wall or mountain nor the true position of the object in relation to the 
mountain or wall (even if the object is not excessively far from the eye) 
because of the dimness of the light on the ground on a dark night. Then, as the 
observer continues to move further the visible gap between the object and the 
mountain or wall will widen and appear to increase in width as the observer 
36b persists in this motion, though he is sure | in [his] mind that the mountain or 
wall is motionless. If the observer had no prior knowledge of that object and 
of its being fixed in its own place he may believe it to be in motion and 
attribute the continual widening of the gap between it and the mountain or 
wall to this motion. And if sight perceives a stationary object to be in motion 
then it errs in its perception of the object’s motion. 

C(9) 

[117] Error may occur in regard to rest because of the paucity of light. For 
when sight perceives a rotating millstone in the darkness of night, it may fail 
to sense its motion and perceive it to be at rest. Similarly if, at night or before 
dawn, it perceives from a distance a regular body that undergoes a circular, 
irregular or vibratory motion, 1 it may fail to sense the motion and perceive the 
body to be at rest. And if sight perceives a body in motion to be at rest then it 
errs in regard to rest. But error in regard to both motion and rest is error in 
inference, because motion and rest are perceived by inference. The cause of 


III. 7 

these two errors is that the light in the visible object has fallen outside the 
moderate range by being too little; for when such objects as these | are seen in 
moderate light their motion or rest will be perceived as it is, provided that the 
remaining properties in these objects are in the moderate range. 

C(io-i3) 

[118] Error may also occur in regard to roughness and smoothness when the 
light in the object falls outside the moderate range. For sight does not perceive 
the roughness of objects in obscure places or in the darkness of night if their 
surfaces are only slightly rough. Similarly, sight cannot perceive the smooth- 
ness of smooth or polished objects in obscure places, nor can it discriminate 
between smooth and rough surfaces in obscure places or in the darkness of 
night. And if sight fails to sense the smoothness or roughness of an object it 
may mistake one for the other as a result of likening the object to another 
similar to it in the manifest properties but not in respect of smoothness or 
roughness. But if sight believes a smooth object to be rough then it errs in 

in 137b regard to the object’s roughness, and if) it believes a rough object to be 
smooth then it errs in regard to the object’s smoothness. 

[119] Similarly also, when sight perceives a transparent body along with the 
light that lies behind it (this light being little), the object’s transparency will 
appear to be less than its true transparency. And if sight perceives the 
transparency of an object to be less than its true transparency then it errs in 
regard to the object’s transparency. Further, looking at a transparent object in a 
very obscure place, sight will not perceive its transparency, and therefore will 
believe the object to be opaque in the absence of prior knowledge of its being 
transparent. And if sight believes a transparent object to be opaque then it errs 
in regard to the object’s opacity. 

[120] But errors in regard to roughness, smoothness, transparency and 
opacity are errors in inference because these [properties] are perceived only by 
inference. The reason why these errors occur in the ways we have described is 
that the light in those objects has fallen excessively short of the moderate 
range; for, looking at these objects in a moderate light, sight can perceive their 

hi i 3 8 a roughness | or smoothness or their transparency or opacity as they are and, 

therefore, does not err in regard to any of these properties, provided that the 
remaining properties in these objects are within the moderate range. 

Q14-15) 

[121] Error may also occur in regard to shadow when the light in the object 
falls outside the moderate range. For let the wall in some chamber be partly 
white or of a pale colour 1 and partly black or of a dark colour, and let the 
separation between these two parts run along the height of the wall (a situation 


322 


Optics 


323 


i 

I 

| which exists in the case of walls partly blackened by fires kindled in a court 

which they surround); let this wall face the door of the chamber and let a lamp 
be placed at night behind the door and at some distance from it; so that the 
light of the lamp, having entered through the door and shone from a distance 
upon that wall, will cover a portion of both the pale and the black parts; and let 
( 138b the light be | faint on account of the lamp’s distance: looking at such a wall 
sight may believe the illuminated black part to be shadowed, provided that it 
had no prior knowledge of the blackness of that place. For that wall would be 
usually shaded by the opposite wall in which the chamber’s door exists; and 
because the light falling upon it is faint, sight will not discriminate blackness 
from shadow, especially if the part of the wall adjacent to this part is of a white 
or pale colour. And since sight is accustomed to liken what it perceives at the 
moment to similar things perceived earlier, it may believe the black or 
dark-coloured wall next to the white or pale-coloured part to be shaded, 
despite the light that shines upon it from the lamp, provided that this light is 
faint. But if sight perceives an illuminated and unshaded body to be shadowed 
then it errs in regard to the shadow perceived. 

[122] Similarly, looking in the darkness of night at a white wall with black 
[ 139a areas on it, and assuming the wall | to be dimly lighted by a lamp, sight may 

believe the black spots to be windows or apertures in the wall and the 
blackness visible in them to be the darkness inside those apertures. 

[123] But if sight believes a black solid body to be an empty dark place then 
it errs in its perception of the body’s darkness. And error in regard to shadow 
and darkness is error in inference because shadow and darkness are perceived 
through inference. The cause of this error is that the light in the object has 
fallen outside the moderate range; for when these objects are seen in moderate 
light and from that same distance, sight will perceive them as they are and will 
therefore make no error in regard to their being shaded or dark, provided that 
the remaining properties in those objects are in the moderate range. 

C(i 6 -I 7 ) 

[124] Error may also occur in regard to beauty when the light in the object 
falls outside the moderate range. For let an object of a beautiful form have 

[ 139b some features which mar it but | which are not completely visible as a result of 
being somewhat subtle or faint, and let the object be looked at at night while 
being dimly lighted by a lamp. Sight will perceive such an object to be of a 
beautiful form and fail to perceive any of the features that mar it. An example 
of this is a person who has a beautifully formed face but who has all or some of 
a number of features that mar his appearance and detract from his beauty — 
blue eyes, blond hair, 1 freckles in his face, or some other defect of com- 
plexion. Looking at such a person at night in the light of a dim lamp sight will 


III. 7 

perceive the shape of his, generally, beautiful organs and limbs but fail to 
perceive those features that mar his form because the light is faint and because 
subtle features can be perceived only in a strong light. | Indeed it frequently 
happens that a person appears beautiful in the dim light of a lamp without in 
fact being so. Similarly, sight perceives as beautiful all objects in which 
beautiful features are manifest and features that mar it and make it ugly are not 
completely evident. When the beautiful elements of a form are apparent but 
not its disfiguring features, sight will perceive that form as being beautiful and 
will not attribute ugliness to it. But if sight perceives disfigured forms as being 
beautiful then it errs in regard to their beauty. 

[125] Similarly, if sight perceives at night or in faint light or in obscure 
places objects in which manifest properties are ugly but the subtle and 
imperfectly visible features are beautiful and confer beauty on the form as a 
whole, it will perceive those objects as being ugly and will not attribute any 
beauty to them as long as it fails to perceive the subtle features in them. 

II 140b [126] But if sight perceives a beautiful form to be ugly then it errs | in 

regard to the form’s ugliness. And error in regard to beauty and ugliness is 
error in inference because beauty and ugliness are perceptible through 
inference, and because such error arises from sight’s reliance on the manifest 
properties alone and its acquiescence in their conclusions without con- 
sideration of the properties that may for the moment be hidden from sight. 
The cause of this error is that the light in the object has fallen outside the 
moderate range; for when such objects are seen in moderate light sight 
perceives the beautiful or ugly features in the beautiful or ugly objects and 
does not mistake one kind for the other, provided that the other properties of 
these objects are in the moderate range. 

C(i8-i9) 

[127] It is in this same manner that error may also occur in regard to 
similarity and dissimilarity . For let the eye look at two objects in an obscure 
place or in the faint light of a lamp; let these two objects be similar in their 
■H 141a manifest properties | (such as colour, shape, figure and the shapes of the 
object’s parts); let them also differ in respect of their subtle features (such as a 
blue or grey colour of the eyes, a blond [streak in his hair], freckles or other 
blemishes and marks 1 in the case of human beings, or small designs and line 
patterns in the case of cloth, draperies, utensils and other inanimate objects): 
sight will perceive two such objects to be similar, and will not attribute any 
dissimilarity to them, for the reason that it does not perceive their subtle and 
differentiating features in that dark place or dim light. But if sight perceives 
two dissimilar objects as being similar in every respect and attributes no 
dissimilarity to them, then it errs in regard to their similarity. 



324 


Optics 


325 


[128] Similarly, if the two objects differ in their manifest properties (namely 
colour, shape, size, figure and the shapes and figures of parts) while being 
similar in respect of their subtle features, sight will perceive two such 

141b objects in an obscure place or in dim light as being dissimilar in every respect. | 
It will not attribute any similarity to them as long as it fails to perceive the 
subtle details in respect of which they are similar. If sight perceives two similar 
objects as being dissimilar and attributes no similarity to them then it errs in 
regard to their dissimilarity. 

[129] Now error in regard to similarity and dissimilarity is error in 
inference because similarity and dissimilarity are perceived by inference, and 
because this error only arises from sight’s reliance on the manifest properties 
alone and its acquiescence in the conclusions [to be drawn from them]. The 
cause of this error is that the light in these objects has fallen outside the 
moderate range by being too little; for when such objects are seen in moderate 
light sight perceives their similarity or difference according as they are similar 
or different, and does not mistake one for the other, if the remaining 
properties in these objects are in the moderate range. 

[130] It is, therefore, in these and similar manners that sight errs in inference 
when the light in the visible objects exceeds the range of moderateness. 

D. Errors of sight in inference 
when the size of the visible object 
falls outside the moderate range 

D(i) 

[42a [131] Sight errs in | inference when the size of the object falls outside the 

moderate range. This is, for example, the case when two objects lie close to 
one another on the surface of the ground at a fairly large distance from the eye. 
Let one of them be farther off than the other by a small amount that has no 
sensible magnitude in relation to the total distance; and let the interval on the 
ground along their distance be among the greatest intervals that sight can 
perceive and whose magnitudes it can ascertain, and not among the smallest of 
such intervals. Sight will perceive these two objects to be equidistant [from 
itself] and will not sense the difference between their distances (provided the 
difference is small and of no sensible magnitude in relation to the total 
distance), even though their distances are moderate and of ascertainable size. 1 

[132] The reason is that a moderate distance of ascertainable size is that at 
which a magnitude bearing a sensible ratio to the total distance does not 

142b become invisible. That being so, | a magnitude may not be visible from a 
moderate distance if it does not bear a sensible ratio to the total distance. If the 


III. 7 

moderate distance is among the largest of such distances, then that part of it 
(near the far end) that bears no sensible ratio to the whole will not be visible, 
even though this part may be among the magnitudes that can be seen from a 
shorter distance. Therefore, looking at two objects whose distances are among 
the largest of the moderate distances, and assuming the distance of the farther 
object to exceed that of the nearer by an amount whose magnitude bears no 
sensible ratio to the whole distance, sight will perceive those two objects to be 
equidistant [from itself] and fail to sense the difference between their distances. 

[133] But if sight perceives two unequal distances to be equal then it errs in 
regard to their equality, and this will be an error in inference because distances 
and their equality are perceived through inference. The cause of this error is 
that the amount of difference between the two distances has fallen outside the 

ni 143a moderate range; for when the magnitude of the difference is fairly large | sight 
will perceive it and therefore perceive the inequality of the two distances, 
provided that the remaining conditions that relate to those two objects and 
their distances are in the moderate range. 

D(2) 

[134] Error may also occur in regard to the position of an object when the 
object’s size falls outside the moderate range. For suppose that the object is 
extremely small, say about the size of a mustard seed, and suppose that the eye 
looks at it while the object’s plane surface is slightly inclined to the radial lines. 
Sight will not perceive the object’s inclination nor discriminate between the 
object’s oblique and frontal positions but rather perceive it in both cases as 
being in the frontal direction. For imagine the transverse line through the 
middle of the [horizontal] edge of the extremely small and oblique surface; this 
line, being perpendicular to the common axis, will define the frontal direction; 

in 143b | further, each of the distances of the two ends of the edge of the inclined 

surface from that line will be extremely small. If the inclination of the surface 
is slight and the object is extremely small, then the sum of these two distances 
will be too small to be perceived by the sense-faculty, even if the object lies on 
the ground at a moderate distance that extends along a succession of bodies. 
Now the sum of these two distances is approximately equal to the difference 
between the distances of those two ends of the object from the eye. But sight 
can detect the object’s obliquity only by perceiving the difference between the 
distances of its ends, and, therefore, if that difference is not sensible, sight will 
not be able to perceive the object’s inclination. Therefore, looking at a small 
object such as we have described, sight will not perceive its inclination or 
discriminate between its oblique and frontal positions. 

[135] Now let us imagine this object to stretch in the far-near direction and 
in 144a thus grow in width; | its [vertical] edges will recede farther from the transverse 


326 


Optics 


327 


11 144b 


1 


[II 145a 


line and their distances [from that line] will increase as the object becomes 
wider. Eventually the receding edges of this object will reach a limit at which 
the sum of the two distances (or even one of them) will have an appreciable 
magnitude in relation to that same distance of the object’s middle [from the 
eye], namely the distance at which the sum of the distances of the two 
[vertical] edges of the extremely small object was not perceptible. Now the 
sum of the distances of the two [vertical] edges of the inclined surface is 
approximately the same as the difference between the distances of the object’s 
edges [from the eye]. Therefore, if the surface of a fairly large object is inclined 
to the frontal direction, sight will perceive its inclination, even though this 
inclination may be equal to the imperceptible inclination of a very small 
object. But if the plane surface of an extremely small object is slightly inclined 
to the frontal direction, sight will not in most cases perceive its inclination but 
rather perceive it as if it were frontally facing the eye. 

[136] But if sight perceives an inclined object | as frontally oriented and fails 
to discriminate between the object’s obliquity and frontality then it errs in 
regard to the object’s position. And error in regard to position is error in 
inference because position is perceived through inference. The cause of this 
error is that the object’s position has fallen outside the moderate range; for 
looking at a fairly large object from a moderate distance at which the obliquity 
of a small and equally inclined object is not perceptible, sight will perceive the 
inclination of that object as it is and will not err in regard to its position, 
provided that the other properties in that object are in the moderate range, as is 
clear from the explanation we have just given. 

D(3) 

[137] Error may also occur in regard to shape when the object’s size falls 
outside the moderate range. For suppose that certain corrugations or angles 
exist in a very small object, such as a tiny particle or mustard seed or, in 
general, one of the smallest magnitudes that can be seen; sight will not be able 
to perceive these corrugations or angles though it can perceive the object as a 
whole. | For since the object is one of the smallest that can be seen, its small 
parts will be imperceptible. And if sight fails to perceive the angles and 
corrugations in an object then it fails to perceive the true shape of the object 
but rather perceives the object to be round or oblong or of a shape free from 
corners and ridges, whether this object is a body or the surface of a body. 

[138] Similarly, if a slight convexity or concavity exists in the surface of 
such an object, sight will perceive it to be plane and thus fail to ascertain the 
figure of its surface or to discriminate between a convex (or concave) surface 
and one that is. plane, provided that the object is extremely small. 

[139] But if sight perceives the shape of an object to be other than it is then it 
errs in regard to the object’s shape, and an error that arises in this manner in 


HI. 7 

regard to shape is an error in inference. The cause of this error is that the 
object’s size has fallen outside the moderate range; for sight can perceive the 

1 u5 b shape of a fairly large object as it is, and can perceive its angles | and ridges, and 

make no error regarding its shape provided that the other properties in the 
object are in the moderate range. 

D(4) 

[140] Error may also occur in regard to an object’s size when this size falls 
outside the moderate range. For let two objects be perceived at once, and let 
them differ slightly in length or breadth or both: sight may believe these- two 
objects to be of equal size for the reason that the difference between their 
magnitudes is extremely small. Sight cannot perceive the difference between 
the magnitudes of objects unless that difference is fairly large and, moreover, 
bears a measurable ratio to each of the two magnitudes. Furthermore, the sizes 
of bodies can be ascertained only after they have been estimated by means of 
some measure: 1 thus, if sight were able to achieve an invariably faultless and 
ascertained perception of the equality, inequality and the amount of difference 
between magnitudes, there would be no need for estimating the size of 

11 146a bodies | by means of measures. 

[141] But if sight perceives two unequal objects to be equal then it errs in 
regard to the size of one or both of these objects. And error in regard to size is 
error in inference. The cause of this error is that the amount of difference 
between the two objects has fallen outside the moderate range by being too 
small; for when the difference between two unequal objects is fairly large, 
sight will be able to perceive it, provided that their other properties are in the 
moderate range. 

D(5-7) 

[142] Error may also occur in regard to separation because of the excessive 
smallness [of the visible object]. For, looking at an empty glass vessel on the 
interior side of which a black hair is stuck, sight might believe the hair to be a 
crack in the glass provided it had no prior knowledge of that hair. This error 
can occur only because the hair is extremely fine; for if a dense and fairly large 
body were attached to the interior side of the vessel, sight would not believe it 

in 146b to be a crack in the glass. And if sight believes a sound vessel to be | cracked 
then it errs in this belief. 

[143] Error may also occur in regard to continuity because of the small size 
[of the visible object]. For often bodies are neatly packed together so that the 
separations between them become too small to be visible. For example, when 
sheets of writing paper are bound together and their edges trimmed, the 
separations between them are frequently too thin and narrow to be seen; the 

22 


L 


328 


Optics 


329 


thickness of a collection of such neatly stacked sheets might appear as a single 
continuous body. Looking, therefore, at the thickness of these papers without 
being able to see the whole book into which they are bound, and without the 
beholder’s prior knowledge that a book exists in that place, sight will believe 
those papers to constitute a single continuous body — the reason being the 
excessive narrowness of the separations between the sheets as a result of their 

147a being closely packed together. | And if sight perceives a multiplicity of stacked 
papers as being a single continuous body without sensing their separations 
then it errs in what it perceives of their continuity and also their number. 

[144] But to err in regard to separation, continuity and number is to err in 
inference, because separation, continuity and number are perceived by infer- 
ence. The cause of these errors is that the separations have fallen outside the 
moderate range by being too narrow; for when the separations between these 
objects (or the bodies that resemble separations) are fairly large, sight is able to 
perceive them as they are, provided that the other properties in the objects are 
in the moderate range. 

| D<8) 

[145] Error may also occur in regard to motion because of the excessive 
smallness [of the visible object]. For let the eye view two objects that move on 
two similar intervals; 1 let the objects cover two parts of the similar intervals 1 
in the same time, and let one of the parts covered by the moving objects 

147b exceed the other by an amount which is extremely small | by comparison with 
the whole of either of these two parts: sight will perceive such two motions as 
equal and will have no doubt regarding their equality (despite their inequality) 
because of the small difference between the intervals covered by those two 
objects. 

[146] But if sight perceives two unequal motions as being equal then it errs 
in regard to their equality; and error in regard to motions, their equality and 
inequality is error in inference because these things are perceived by inference. 
The cause of this error is that the difference between the intervals covered by 
the moving object in the same time has fallen outside the moderate range. For 
when two mobile objects cover in the same time two similar distances, 1 and 
the difference between these distances is fairly large, then sight will clearly 
perceive the inequality of the two motions, provided that the other conditions 
relating to those two distances are in the moderate range. 

D(9) 

148a [147] Error may also occur in regard to rest | on account of the excessive 

smallness [of the visible object]. For, looking at an extremely small object, 
such as a small particle or mosquito, which is fixed in one place but whose 


III. 7 

organs or parts are in motion, sight will not be able in most cases to perceive the 
motion of those parts, and, therefore, will believe the object to be stationary. 

[148] But if sight perceives a moving animal to be stationary then it errs in 
what it perceives of the animal’s rest, and this will be an error in inference 
because rest is perceived by inference. The cause of this error is that the parts of 
the mosquito (or particle) have fallen outside the range of moderateness by 
being too small. For, looking at an animal whose organs are fairly large, sight 
will be able to perceive clearly the movement of its members provided that the 
other properties in that animal are within the moderate range. 

D(io-ir) 

[149] Error may also occur in regard to roughness and smoothness on account 

in 148b of the excessive smallness [of the visible object]. | For, looking at an extremely 

small object, such as a mosquito or a tiny particle (or their parts), sight will not 
sense the configuration of their surfaces nor whether they are rough or 
smooth. For roughness and smoothness are perceptible only by perceiving the 
parts df the surface and the similarity or dissimilarity of their positions, or by 
perceiving the variation or uniformity of the form of the light that appears in 
that surface. But if the object is very small sight will not be able to perceive the 
parts of its surface and therefore will fail to perceive the roughness or 
smoothness of the surface. Sight might thus believe such objects to be rough 
when they are smooth or the other way round. 

[150] That being the case sight may err in regard to the roughness or 
smoothness of such objects when it conjectures these properties and thus 

in 149a makes an error in inference, for | a conjecture regarding the roughness or 
smoothness of an object must be based on a sign that indicates the believed 
roughness or smoothness of the object, or on likening the object to other 
rough or smooth objects. The cause of this error, when it occurs, is the 
excessive smallness of the object, for sight is capable of truly perceiving the 
roughness or smoothness of an object when the other properties in the object 
are within the moderate range. 

0(12-13) 

[151] With regard to transparency , let the visible object be a very small stone 
the colour of which resembles that of transparent stones: sight might believe 
that object to be transparent (although it is not so) because it is similar in 
colour and form to coloured transparent stones or gems. This error arises 
when sight is not able to see through the object because of its excessive 
smallness, and, relying on the manifest properties (namely colour and polish) 
that resemble those of transparent gems, [sight will believe the object to be a 
transparent stone]. 


330 


Optics 


33i 


[152] Error may also occur in regard to opacity when the visible object is 
excessively small. Let the extremely small object have the size of a part of a 

( uyb mustard seed; let it be slightly transparent, | of a strong but dark colour, and let 
it be placed on the surface of the ground or another opaque body: sight will not 
be able to perceive the transparency of such an object when viewing it because, 

1 since it is placed upon an opaque body, no light will appear behind it. And 

since the object is extremely small and, moreover, has a strong colour, sight 
will not be able to distinguish its colour from that of the body that lies behind 
it or below it, assuming that the colour of that body shows through the small 
object. In most cases, therefore, sight will not perceive the transparency of an 
excessively small object if it has a strong and dark colour and, consequently, 
will perceive such an object as being opaque. 

[ 153 ] But if sight perceives a transparent object as being opaque then it errs 
in believing the object to be opaque. And errors in regard to transparency and 
opacity are errors in inference because transparency and opacity are percep- 
tible through inference. The cause of the occurrence of these two errors in the 
ways we have described is that, the object being excessively small, sight is 

1 150.1 hindered from contemplating the conditions of the object. | For when the 
object is fairly large sight is able to perceive its transparency or opacity, 
provided that the object’s other properties are in the moderate range. 

£>(14-15) 

| [154] Error may also occur in some way in regard to shadow and darkness on 

account of the excessive smallness of the object. For when black or dark- 
coloured spots exist on white walls or doors or wooden boards, sight may 
believe these spots to be small or tiny holes, taking their blackness to be 
darkness inside the holes, or taking their dark colours (when the surface is 
illuminated with a strong light) to be shadows within the holes, it being often 
the case that light fails to enter holes. 

[155] But if sight believes these spots to be apertures and their blackness to 
be darkness, or if it believes their colours to be darkened by the shadow inside 
the apertures, then it errs in regard to the shadow or darkness it believes itself 

1 150b to see. And this is an error in inference because shadow | and darkness are 
perceived by inference. The cause of this error is the small size of these spots, 
for sight is able to perceive fairly large spots in the surfaces of bodies as they are 
and makes no mistake regarding them, provided that their other properties are 
within the moderate range. 

D(i6-I7) 

[156] Error may also occur in regard to beauty and ugliness because of the 
excessive smallness [of the visible object]. For let the shape of an extremely 


III. 7 

small object be ugly, and let the form of the object be marred further by 
extremely small angles and ridges or by certain minute blemishes, such as 
tattoo marks or freckles; and let these angles, ridges or minute disfiguring 
features be too small to be visible: sight will perceive the shape and form of the 
object to be other than it is by failing to perceive the minute features that 
Hi 151a disfigure the object. And if it fails to perceive those disfiguring features | then it 
will not perceive the object’s ugliness. And since what appears of the shape 
and colour and general appearance of the object’s form is beautiful, sight will 
perceive the object as being beautiful and therefore err in what it perceives of 
the object’s beauty. 

[157] Similarly, if the manifest form of an extremely small object is ugly, 
and the object has certain minute but unperceived features that beautify its 
form, sight will perceive that object to be ugly. But since the object’s form is 
beautiful by virtue of its minute features, and ugly by virtue of its manifest 
form, and sight perceives the latter but not the former, and consequently 
believes the object to be ugly, it then errs in this regard. 

[158] Now error in regard to beauty and ugliness is error in inference 
because beauty and ugliness are perceived by inference, and because this error 

111151b arises from sight’s reliance on the manifest properties | and acquiescence in 
their conclusions. The cause of this error is the excessive smallness of the 
object; for when the visible object is fairly large, both its beautifying and 
disfiguring features will be visible, provided that the other properties are in the 
moderate range. 

D(i8-I9) 

[159] Error may also occur in the same way in regard to similarity and 
dissimilarity because of the excessive smallness [of the visible objects]. For let 
two very small objects be the same in regard to what appears of their forms but 
differ with respect to certain minute features; and let the eye perceive the 
apparent forms of the two objects but not their minute features (on account of 
their excessive smallness and subtlety). Sight will believe these objects to be 
similar and attribute no dissimilarity to them. If sight perceives two dissimilar 
objects as being similar then it errs in regard to their similarity. 

[160] Similarly, if the apparent forms of two objects are different and the 
ni 152a objects share certain subtle features which, unlike the manifest forms, are not j 

perceived because of their subtlety, then sight will believe those objects to be 
dissimilar and attribute no similarity to them. And if sight perceives two 
similar objects to be dissimilar in every respect then it errs in believing them to 
be dissimilar. 

[161] But error in regard to similarity and dissimilarity is error in inference 
because it arises from sight’s reliance on the apparent properties and aquiescence 



3 32 


Optics 


333 


in their conclusions. The cause of this error is excessive smallness; for if the 
two objects are fairly large and they are similar or dissimilar with respect to 
certain subtle features which correspond to the features of the excessively 
small object but which are proportionate to the fairly large object, then sight 
will perceive the objects’ similarity and dissimilarity, provided that the 
remaining properties of the objects are in the moderate range. 

[162] It is in these and similar ways, therefore, that sight errs in | inference 
when the size 1 of the object or of its properties falls outside the moderate 
range. 

E. Errors of sight in inference 
when the opacity of the visible object 
falls outside the moderate range 

E(l-2) 

[163] Error may occur in inference when the object’s opacity falls outside 
the moderate range. This happens, for example, in the case of a very 
transparent and pure white object (such as glass or crystal or the like) when a 
strong light shines behind such an object and the object is fairly thick and has a 
plane surface that is oblique to the radial lines; for the eye will perceive such an 
object to be strongly luminous. If the object is raised above the ground and is 
not in touch with any opaque object, sight will neither ascertain the obliquity 
of the surface (thus perceiving it as if it were frontal) nor determine its figure. 
For if the object is extremely transparent and the light behind it is strong, sight 
will perceive that light | but not the extremely transparent object itself. And if 
the object is slightly opaque, sight will perceive its opacity, but this perception 
will not be clear. In this case, therefore, sight will not be able to ascertain the 
figure or position of the object’s surface nor discriminate between the 
obliquity of such a surface and frontality. And if sight perceives an oblique 
surface as being frontal then it will have erred in regard to the position of the 
object and also the distance of its extremities [from the eye], since the distances 
of the extremities of an oblique object are unequal whereas those of the 
extremities of a frontal surface are equal, and if sight perceives an oblique 
surface to be frontal then it will perceive the unequal distances to be equal. 

E(3) 

[164] Again, if the surface of such an object is slightly convex or slightly 
concave, sight will not be able to perceive its convexity or concavity nor 
discriminate between convex and concave surfaces, provided that the body is 
very transparent with only a little opacity in it, | and that its convexity or 


III. 7 

concavity is slight and the light appearing behind it is strong, because in these 
circumstances sight will fail to ascertain the form of the object’s surface. And if 
sight fails to perceive the convexity or concavity in the object’s surface, then it 
will err in regard to the shape of the surface. 

E(4) 

[165] And if such a transparent object whose plane surface is inclined to the 
radial lines is seen as being in the frontal position then sight will have also erre 
in regard to the size of chat surface. For sight perceives size only by estimating 
it by the angle subtended by that magnitude, and by its distance. If sight senses 
the inclination of the oblique object, it will perceive its size to be greater than 
that of a frontal object subtending an equal angle. If sight perceives the oblique 
object to be frontally placed then it will estimate the object’s size by the angle 
subtended and by the distances of the object’s extremities regarded as being 

111154a equal; sight will then perceive the object to be smaller | than its real 
magnitude. 

E(5-7) 

[166] Let a line be drawn on the surface of this transparent body, using an 
opaque coloured material; or let a part of the body be opaque and let it extend 
along the length or breadth of the transparent body; or let an opaque object 
(such as a rod) be stuck to the back side of the transparent body; and let that 
line, part or rod be fairly wide: sight may believe the transparent body to be 
two separate bodies, thus taking the opaque line or part which it sees in the 
body’s surface to be a third body intervening between two transparent bodies. 
The reason is that the intensity of the light that appears behind the transparent 
body will prevent the eye from contemplating the properties of that body. 
Thus if an opaque and fairly broad part of it appears in the surface of such an 
object, sight will not be able to ascertain the continuity of the transparent 
body. And if sight believes a continuous body to be two separate bodies, then 
it errs in regard to the separation it perceives and also in regard to number. 

111154b | [167] Similarly, if two or more transparent bodies are placed one upon 

another, and their coincident surfaces are very much alike, sight will fail to 
perceive their separateness. 

[168] Again, if a small separation exists between two such bodies, and the 
line of separation between them exists in the surface that is inclined to the 
radial lines, then sight will not perceive their separation — the reason being 
that the light behind the separation will not be visible. Perceiving only the 
light behind the transparent body, sight will fail to sense the separation. 

[169] But if sight fails to perceive the separation, it will believe the. two 
objects to be a single continuous object, and if it believes two or more separate 
objects to be a single continuous object then it errs in regard to the separation 


334 


Optics 


335 


perceived and also in regard to the object’s number. And errors in regard to 
distance or position or shape or magnitude or separation or continuity or 
number are errors in inference, because these properties are perceptible only 
55a by inference. The cause | of these errors is that the opacity of the object has 
fallen outside the moderate range; for if the object is opaque, or if it has little 
transparency and much opacity, the light that shines behind it will not be 
excessively strong, and in this case sight will be able to perceive the inclination 
of the object’s surface (if it is inclined), the difference between the distances of 
the object’s edges, the size of the object, the continuity of the object or the 
separation that may exist in it, and all other properties in the object without 
erring in regard to any of them, provided that the remaining properties in that 
object are in the moderate range. 

E(8— 9) 

[170] Error may also occur in regard to motion when the object’s opacity 
falls outside the moderate range. For let the eye view a very transparent and 
pure white body whose edges are hidden from view as a result of being looked 

55b at through an aperture or narrow door; let | a multi-coloured object exist 
behind this body — either close to it or in touch with it; let the multi-coloured 
object have a rotary or irregular or vibratory motion, 1 so that it moves along 
the direction of the transparent body’s breadth and returns swiftly to the side 
from which it started: sight will believe this transparent body to be in motion 
provided that the beholder had no prior knowledge of it as a transparent body. 
For, in the absence of previous knowledge of the transparency of that body, 
the beholder will believe the colour that appears behind it to belong to the 
body itself and thus believe the body to be opaque, and upon perceiving the 
succession or varying positions of colours of the object in motion behind the 
transparent body, he will believe that motion or succession to belong to the 
body which it perceives and believes to be opaque and coloured. And if sight 
perceives a stationary object to be in motion then it errs in regard to the 
perceived motion of that object. 

[171] Error may also occur in regard to rest because of excessive trans- 
56a parency [of the visible object]. Let the eye view | a spherical and very 

transparent body (such as a crystal sphere) which is being rotated in someone’s 
hand without the beholder’s awareness of its being moved: sight will perceive 
this sphere to be stationary and fail to sense its motion. For if the sphere is very 
transparent and there is no opacity in it, the parts of it will be similar. And if it 
rotates while being in the same place, sight will perceive only the single body 
that lies behind it. But rotary motion can be visible only through the 
succession of the visible object’s parts. Therefore, if the parts of the sphere are 
similar, and there is only one body that appears behind it at one place, sight 


III. 7 

will fail to perceive the succession of the parts of the sphere, and, failing to 
perceive its motion, will believe it to be stationary. But if sight perceives as 
stationary an object in motion then it errs in regard to the object’s motion. 

ill 156b [l 7 2 ] Now errors in regard to motion and rest | are errors in inference 

because motion and rest are perceptible through inference. The cause of errors 
in regard to motion and rest, such as we have described, is the body’s extreme 
transparency; for when the body is opaque or when it has little opacity, sight 
can perceive it as it is and can perceive its transparency and distinguish its 
colour from that of the body that lies behind it. And if sight can make this 
distinction while the transparent body is motionless, then it can sense the 
motion or rest of the farther body, provided that the remaining properties in 
that transparent body are within the moderate range. 

E(io-ii) 

[173] Error may also occur in regard to roughness and smoothness because of 
extreme transparency. For if the eye looks at a rough-surfaced and extremely 
transparent object behind which a very strong light is visible, it will not 

111157a perceive | the roughness in the object’s surface. Similarly, if the surface is 
smooth, sight will not perceive its smoothness. And if the surface of that 
object is smooth and the light appearing behind it is not uniform (which 
happens [for example] when a body stands on another whose small parts are 
variously coloured and the body on which the light shines is manifestly 
rough), then sight may believe the surface of such an object to be rough 
although this is not the case. And if the surface of the object is rough, but sight 
fails to sense its roughness because of the strong light that appears behind it, 
then it will be believed to be smooth. And if sight believes a rough body to be 
smooth then it errs in regard to the object’s smoothness. 

[174] Error in regard to roughness and smoothness is error in inference 
because roughness and smoothness are perceived through inference. The 
cause of this error is that the object’s opacity has fallen outside the moderate 

111157b range; | for sight can perceive the roughness or smoothness of an opaque 
object (or one that is strongly so) provided that the remaining properties in 
that object are in the moderate range. 

E(i 2 -i 3 ) 

[175] Error may also occur in regard to transparency on account of its 
excessiveness. For suppose that behind a transparent and pure white body a 
second body is stuck to it which is of weak transparency but has a strong and 
bright colour: sight will perceive two such bodies as if they were one. It will 
also perceive the first body to be coloured with the colour of the second and 
perceive the first body’s transparency to be similar to that of the second. This 



Optics 


337 


336 

state of affairs is frequently found in the case of sheets of glass that have been 
stacked together or glass gems that have been mounted on top of one another, 
when one is coloured and the other pure white. For when the first body is very 
transparent and the second has weak transparency and a strong colour, sight 
will perceive the second and fail to sense the first because of its excessive 

58a transparency, and | the two bodies will together appear as if they were one. 
Again, if the two bodies are both pure white and of equal transparency, and a 
coloured liquid is interposed between them, they will both appear to have the 
colour of that liquid, and their transparency will appear to be less than it is. 
And if sight perceives the transparency of a transparent body to be less than its 
real transparency then it errs in regard to the body’s transparency. 

[176] In the same manner, error may also occur in regard to opacity. For if 
the first body is pure white and extremely transparent, while the second that is 
stuck behind it is opaque and coloured, sight will perceive the first to be 
opaque if the beholder had no prior knowledge of its transparency. [Similarly] 
sight does not sense the transparency of transparent vessels if they contain a 
coloured opaque body or a strong-coloured beverage, and if the light behind 
them is not visible and the transparency of the beverage that is in them not 
apparent. Thus if the beholder had no prior knowledge of the transparency of 
these vessels, and he fails to perceive the separation between them and the 

s sb beverage that is in them, he may | believe them to be opaque — this belief 
being due to the excessive transparency of the vessels and the strength of the 
colour that appears behind them. If, therefore, the beholder had no previous 
knowledge of the transparency of these vessels he may believe that that colour 
belongs to them and that they are opaque. And if sight believes a transparent 
body to be opaque then it errs in regard to the object’s opacity. 

[177] Errors in regard to transparency and opacity are errors in inference 
because these properties are perceived by inference. The cause of these two 
errors is the extreme transparency of the first body; for if this body is strongly 
opaque with only a little transparency in it, and there exists behind it another 
transparent body, sight will not err in regard to its transparency or the degree 
of this transparency, provided that the posterior body has a strong and bright 
colour and that the first body is pure white and that all other properties in it are 
in the moderate range. 

E(i 4 ) 

[178] Error may also occur in regard to shadow on account of extreme 
transparency. Let an opening in the wall of a chamber lead to another chamber 
or to open space; let the front of that opening be covered by a transparent 

59a body, such as one of those glass panes 1 which | are set in walls to let in the 
light; let the pane be flat, extremely transparent and pure white; in the opposite 


III. 7 

wall let there be another aperture which is exposed to the sky and which 
allows the light of the sun to enter and reach the opposite transparent body; 
and let the area of illumination not exceed that transparent body. Looking at 
this transparent body from a point not situated on the line of the reflected 
light, sight will perceive it to be shaded and fail to perceive the sunlight 
shining upon it. For when a body is extremely transparent, the light shining 
upon it passes through it (on account of its transparency) and is not fixed in its 
surface. And if that transparent body is polished the light will be reflected 
from it (as well as passing through it). And if the light is not fixed in 
ill 159b that body’s surface and the eye is not situated on the line of reflection, then | 
sight will not perceive the light that shines upon that body. If the opaque 
bodies and walls surrounding that transparent body are shaded, sight will not 
doubt that that body is equally in the shadow, provided that the observer had 
no prior knowledge that light had entered through the opposite hole. 

[179] But if sight perceives as being shaded a body that is irradiated with 
sunlight then it errs in regard to the shadow perceived. And error in regard to 
shadow is error in inference because shadow is perceived by inference. The 
cause of this error is the excessive transparency of the transparent body that is 
perceived in the manner we have described; for when such a body is opaque, 
or has much opacity in it, the light radiating upon it will be fixed in its surface, 
and sight will not perceive the object’s surface as being shaded, provided that 
the remaining properties in that object are in the moderate range. 

E(i 5 ) 

[180] Error may also occur in regard to darkness because of excessive 
[II 1 60a transparency. For vapour and still water, | if pure and very transparent and 

also very deep, are perceived to be dark even when they are irradiated and 
penetrated by light, and even if their background is not black, especially when 
viewed before sunrise or after sunset, or when an [overhanging] cloud 
prevents direct sunlight from reaching the water. At these times sight 
perceives still waters (if pure, very transparent and very deep) to be dark 
although they are not in fact so. 

[181] But if sight perceives darkness in a place where it does not exist as 
perceived, then it errs in regard to the perceived darkness. And error in regard 
to darkness is error in inference because darkness is perceptible through 
inference. The cause of this error is the extreme transparency of these waters, 
for impure water or water that has a little impurity in it and is not extremely 
transparent is not perceived to be dark even when it is very deep. 

hi 1 60b [182] The reason why sight perceives sea water to be dark | when it is yery 

transparent is that water, even when very transparent, is not as transparent as 
air. When, therefore, light shines upon [the water] a shadow will be cast on its 


Optics 


339 


338 

background, and parts of [the water] will cast shadows on other parts; water 
will not, therefore, receive the form of light in the same way as air receives it; 
i consequently, the light in the transparent body, namely the water, will be less 

than that in the air, and will not pass through it in the same way as it does 
through the air. But if light does not penetrate [the water] as it penetrates the 
1 air, and sight perceives the water on account of its density and perceives what 

is inside the water when the latter is pure and transparent, then sight will 
perceive the interior shadow which is cast by parts of the water on other parts. 
And if the water is pure and transparent and also deep, sight will perceive a 
fairly great depth of it. And if sight perceives of it such a depth, while 
perceiving every part of the water in that depth to be shaded, then sight will 
perceive in the water a fairly deep shadow, or multiplied shadow. But if 
shadow is multiplied it turns into deep darkness, for perceptible shadow is like 
1 161a a light colour, and when this | is multiplied it turns into a strong colour. 

[183] This state of affairs has a parallel in coloured transparent bodies, such 
as a delicate-coloured transparent beverage. When such a beverage is being 
poured into a vessel it appears to be white 1 or of a faint colour, the flowing part 

i clearly appearing to be transparent; but when the beverage is collected in a 

large transparent vessel its colour appears to be strong and of a darker tint. 2 If 
no strong light lies behind it the beverage will look opaque. Now the strong 
colour which the delicate-coloured beverage acquires when collected in the 
vessel must be due to the fact that the colour has been multiplied as a result of 
the multiplication of its parts. Similarly, the shadow that is perceptible inside 
the water is a light shadow which is multiplied with the multiplication of the 
parts of the water when the latter is very deep. It is by multiplication, then, 
that shadow turns into deep darkness; and for this reason sight perceives deep 
sea water to be dark. 

[184] Sight does not perceive impure and not very transparent water to be 
dark because such water has a manifest colour and is of strong opacity; sight 

1 161b therefore perceives of the whole of it only a small interval | because of its 
strong colour and weak transparency, and therefore fails to perceive the 
interior shadow because of the slender depth of the shadow perceived and the 
predominance of the colour of the water in that interval over the form of the 
shadow that is in it. 

£(16-19) 

[185] Error may also occur in regard to beauty and ugliness on account of 
excessive transparency. [An example is provided by] transparent vessels, such 
as those made of crystal or glass, if they are of beautiful shapes and pure 
transparency, but with certain non-beautiful colours appearing in other parts 
(such as those produced by defects in crystal or glass) that mar those vessels 


III. 7 

and detract from their beauty. Looking at such vessels when empty, sight will 
perceive their transparency and also their marring defects and, therefore, 
perceive their form as lacking in beauty. If, however, a strong beverage of a 
beautiful colour is poured into the vessels, their form will appear beautiful on 
1 162a account of their beautiful shape and the beautiful [colour] of the beverage; the | 

features in them that detract from this beauty will become invisible as a result 
of being concealed by the beverage. Sight will therefore perceive such vessels 
(if it had not previously been acquainted with them) to be of a beautiful form 
and will not be aware of their ugliness. And if sight perceives an ugly object as 
beautiful then it errs in regard to the beauty [so perceived] in it. 

[186] In this same manner error may occur in regard to the ugliness 
[perceived] in an object on account of transparency. 

[187] [For consider] perfectly crafted transparent objects which, in spite of 
their ugly shapes, have been provided with beautiful designs and sculpted 
figures, 1 and let them be filled with a strong- or dark-coloured beverage or 
with some other fluid body the colour of which is not beautiful. Sight will 
perceive [these vessels] to be ugly and will not be aware of their beautiful 
features, provided that they are extremely transparent. For, being extremely 
transparent, their designs will not be visible, or will not appear as they really 
are. 

II 162b [188] And if | the shapes of these vessels and the colour of the beverage that 

fills them are not beautiful, sight will perceive their ugly features but not their 
beautiful ones. And if sight perceives an object of this description to be ugly 
then it errs in regard to the perceived ugliness. 

[189] It is in this same manner that error may occur in regard to similarity 
and dissimilarity because of excessive transparency. For let two transparent 
objects be similar in shape and transparency; let them have certain designs, 
engravings or mouldings, 1 and let the designs be different in the two objects. 
Further, let the two objects be extremely transparent, and let them be filled 
with a beverage of the same colour. Sight will perceive two such objects as 
similar and will neither sense them nor judge them to be different in any way. 
And if sight perceives as totally similar two objects that differ in certain 
respects, thus failing to perceive their dissimilarity, then it errs in regard to the 
similarity [perceived] in them. 

[190] Similarly, if two such objects differ in their apparent properties but 
M 163a are similar in their designs | or other minute features, then sight will perceive 

them as different and will not be aware of their similarity, and therefore will be 
in error in regard to the dissimilarity perceived in them. 

[191] Now error in regard to beauty, ugliness, similarity and dissimilarity are 
errors in inference, because these properties are perceived through inference, 


340 


Optics 


and because they are due to sight’s reliance on apparent features and its 
acceptance of their conclusions. The cause of this error is excessive trans- 
parency; because if objects are slightly transparent and endowed with some 
opacity, sight will [equally] perceive their properties as they are, whether 
beautiful or ugly, similar or dissimilar, and thus will not fall into error in 
regard to what it perceives of these [properties], provided that the remaining 
properties through which true perception of these objects can be achieved are 
within the moderate range. 

[192] It is, therefore, in these and in similar ways that sight may err in 
inference when the object’s opacity falls outside the range of moderateness. 


F. Errors of sight in inference 
when the transparency of the air 
falls outside the moderate range 


F(i) 

| [193] As to how sight errs in inference when the transparency of the air falls 

l [63b outside the moderate range, this happens in the case of objects seen in the fog j 

or in a dusty atmosphere. It arises when fog spreads through a certain region 
without reaching the eye, or when dust hangs over a certain region of the 
ground outside which the eye is located. Perception of objects through fog is 
something frequently experienced by the inhabitants of mountainous and 
very cold regions (for fog frequently envelops them in winter), and it may also 
take place at certain times in valleys where the air is temperate. 

[194] Sight cannot make sure of the magnitude of the distance of an object 
seen through fog or dust, even if that distance extends along a succession of 
continuous bodies. For sight may fail to perceive the surface of the ground 
through fog or dust, or it may not perceive it well enough to be able to 
ascertain the form of an object on the ground at a distance from one’s feet; or it 
may also fail to ascertain the position of the object if the object is inclined to the 
radial lines, thus failing to distinguish between an oblique and a frontal surface 
of a visible object, especially if the object lies in fog or dust while the eye is 
located in thin air. But if sight perceives an object without ascertaining the 
1 164a magnitude of the object’s distance, it may believe the object to be far | when it 
is in fact near; and this happens [even] in the case of familiar objects, because 
the form of an object perceived in fog or dust is confused and unclear. Or sight 
may believe the visible object to be near when it is in fact far, as in the case of 
mountains and hills. For when sight perceives mountains behind fog or thick 
air it believes them to be near although they are far. That is because of their 
large form; for when sight perceives [their] large size it fails to perceive 


34 i 


III. 7 

correctly the intervening surface of the earth that is close to the eye, since 
their large size is due only to their closeness. And if sight believes a near 
object to be far, or a far object to be near, then it errs in regard to the object’s 
distance. 

F(2) 

[1 95 ] Similarly, sight will perceive an object in fog or dust to be in a frontal 
position even though the object is inclined to the radial lines, because in this 
situation sight will not perceive the object’s form correctly, and will fail to 
perceive the difference between the distances of its extremities [from the eye] 
because it cannot ascertain the magnitude of the object’s distance. But if sight 
fails to perceive this difference, then it will not perceive the obliquity of the 
object’s surface, and in consequence will perceive the surface as if it were 

in 164b frontal. And if sight perceives | an oblique object to be frontal then it errs in 
regard to the object’s position. 

F (3) 

[196] Similarly, if the object’s surface has a slight convexity or concavity, or 
if parts of it are not similarly situated, sight will not perceive that slight 
convexity or concavity if perception takes place in fog or dust; nor will sight 
ascertain the form of that surface or distinguish between a slightly convex and 
a plane surface. And, similarly, it will fail to distinguish between slight 
concavity and planeness. But if sight believes a convex or concave surface to 
be plane, then it errs in regard to the shape of the surface. Again, if the object 
has small angles or ridges, sight will not perceive them in thick fog or in dust, 
nor will it make sure of the shape of such an object. 

F(4) 

[197] Now if the visible object is in fog or dust, and the eye is located in thin 
air, sight will perceive the object’s size to be larger than it really is, in the same 
way as it perceives objects in water. And when sight perceives an object to be 
larger than it really is, then it errs in regard to the object’s size. 

F(5-7) 

hi 165a £198] Let an object be perceived in fog or dust, and let it be a j rough body 

with black or dark-coloured lines drawn on it; sight may take these lines to be 
cracks or interstices, if the beholder had no previous knowledge of such a 
body. Similarly, looking in the fog at walls with black or dark-coloured lines 
on them, sight may believe these lines to be cracks. Again, if bodies are 
stacked together so that the gaps between them are extremely narrow, sight 
will not perceive such gaps if the visible bodies are in fog or dust. 


I t6>b 


II 1 66a 


342 Optics 

[199] Now if sight believes the lines to be cracks, then it errs in regard to the 
perceived separation. And if it does not sense the separations between bodies 
stacked upon one another, then it will perceive those bodies as a single 
continuous body. And if sight perceives several stacked bodies as a single 
continuous body, then it errs in regard to the continuity [perceived], and also in 
regard to number. 

F(i- 7 ) 

[200] Error may occur in regard to all these properties when strong smoke 
gathers in the air but the eye is outside the smoke. For sight | cannot ascertain 
the extent of the distance of objects perceived through smoke, nor can it 
ascertain the position, (or [any of] the properties) ofsuch objects, and will thus 
perceive these objects to be larger than they really are (if the eye is located 
outside the smoke and away from it) 1 because smoke is denser and less 
transparent than air. 

[201] Now error in regard to all these properties is error in inference, 
because all these properties are perceived through inference. The cause of this 
error is the fact that the transparency of the air that intervenes between the eye 
and the object exceeds the moderate range. For each of the properties in the 
same objects in regard to which error occurs when seen in dense air is 
perceived as it is when seen in thin air, and no error arises regarding any of 
these properties, provided that the remaining properties in the objects are 
within the moderate range. 

F(8) 

[202] Error may also arise in regard to motion when the transparency of the 
air falls outside the moderate range. For let sight perceive two objects that 
move in a straight path along the line that joins them to the eye; let the two 
moving objects be close to one another along [their] distance [from the eye], 
such as two horsemen in a fight; let | their motions be unequal, but let the 
difference between the motions be small. Looking at two such objects in the 
fog or dust, sight will not sense the difference between their motions and will 
take them to be equal, unless the difference is very large. For upon looking at 
two such objects in fog or dust, sight will not in this situation clearly perceive 
the surface of the ground, owing to the density of the dust or fog. And if it 
does not perceive the surface of the ground, then it will not perceive the 
magnitude of the distances [from the eye] of the two objects in motion. And if 
it does not perceive that, then it will fail to perceive the difference between the 
magnitudes of the intervals covered by these two moving objects, if that 
difference is small. Sight will only perceive the receding of two such objects as 
they move away from the eye by relating their confused forms to the various 


HI. 7 343 

parts of the ground which they [successively] occupy; 1 but these are very large 
:it [66b parts, not small ones, because | small parts of the ground are not visible in 
excessively dense air. If the difference between the two motions is very large, 
sight will sense their inequality if it looks at the moving objects for a long 
while. But if the difference is small sight will judge the two motions to be 
equal though they are not in fact so. 

[203] Now if sight believes two objects to have equal motions when their 
motions are unequal, then it errs in its belief regarding the manner of their 
motions and the speed or slowness [it ascribes to them]. This is an error in 
inference because motions and the inequality of motions can be perceived only 
through inference. The cause of this error is that the transparency of the air has 
fallen outside the range of moderateness. For, looking at two such objects in 
pure and clear air, sight will perceive the magnitude of the intervals covered 
by the moving objects, and will thus perceive the inequality of their motions 
and distinguish between them in terms of quickness and slowness, provided 
that the other properties in those two objects are within the moderate range. 

F( 9 ) 

hi 167a [204] Error may arise in regard to | rest also when the transparency of the air 

falls outside the moderate range. For let the eye look at a flowing stream of 
water; let the air be pure and clear, and let sight perceive the flowing 
movement of the water; then let a thick fog envelop the place so that it covers 
the water surface: sight will in these circumstances perceive the water but not 
its flowing (unless it is running fast), and will thus perceive the water as if it 
were stationary. For sight perceives the flowing of water from its disturbed 
surface at the time of flowing, and disturbance in a water surface is among the 
subtle features that are perceptible to sight, because sight perceives them only 
from its perception of the different positions of the parts of the water surface 
and the difference in position of these parts is not perfectly apparent when the 
water surface is uniform in colour. But sight cannot obtain ascertained 
perception of the form of visible objects or of their subtle features when these 
in 167b objects are in fog. | Therefore, when sight looks at a flowing stream of water, 
the surface of which is covered by fog, it will perceive that water as stationary 
and fail to sense its flowing. 

[205] But if sight perceives running water as stationary, then it errs in 
regard to the rest it perceives. And this will be an error in inference because 
rest is perceptible through inference. The cause of this error is the density of 
the air; for when sight looks at that water when the air is pure and clear it 
perceives the water’s motion, provided that the remaining properties of that 
water, through which objects can be correctly perceived, are in the moderate 
range. 


23 



344 


Optics 


345 


F(io— 15) 

[206] Error may arise in regard to roughness, smoothness, transparency, opacity, 
shadow and darkness on account of the density of the air. For, looking at a 
slightly rough-surfaced object in the fog or in smoke or thick dust, sight will 
fail to perceive that roughness because it cannot ascertain the form of a surface 

t68a perceived in fog or in smoke or thick dust. And, similarly, sight | will not [in these 

circumstances] perceive the smoothness of [the surface] if it is smooth. And failing 
to ascertain the roughness, smoothness or extreme polishedness in the surface of a 
visible object, sight may liken a rough-surfaced object to a smooth-surfaced one, 
or the contrary, if the two objects resemble one another in the apparent properties 
perceived in that visible object. When that happens sight will be in error in regard to 
the apparent roughness or smoothness of the object. 

[207] Similarly, if the object is slightly transparent, and it is perceived 
through fog or smoke or thick dust, sight will not perceive its transparency or 
will perceive its transparency to be less than it is. And if sight perceives the 
transparency of an object to be less than it is, then it errs in regard to the 
object’s transparency. And if sight fails to perceive the object’s transparency, 
then it may believe the object to be opaque and thus be in error regarding the 
object’s [perceived] opacity. 

[208] Again, let sight perceive a wall one part of which is pure white and 
another of an earthy colour; let the light of fire fall on that wall in the darkness 

1 68b of night; and let some smoke or thick dust face that wall: | sight may believe 

the earth-coloured portion to be a shadow that has been illuminated together 
with the pure white part. And if sight believes an unshaded region to be 
shaded, then it errs in regard to the shadow perceived. 

[209] Similarly, if sight perceives through smoke or dust a wall with some 
black spots in it, it may take those spots to be holes and take their apparent 
blackness to be the darkness of those holes, and thus err in regard to the 
darkness perceived. 

[210] Now errors in regard to roughness or smoothness, transparency or 
opacity, and shadow or darkness are errors in inference, because these 
properties are perceived through inference. The cause of errors [that occur] in 
the manner we have described is that the transparency of the air has fallen 
outside the moderate range; for when the objects which we have described are 
located in an air of pure and clear transparency, sight perceives all of their 

169a properties correctly, | provided that the other properties of these objects are 
within the moderate range. 

F(i6~I9) 

[211] Error may occur also in regard to beauty and ugliness when the 
transparency of the air falls outside the moderate range. For let sight perceive 


III. 7 

through fog or dust a visible object that has a beautiful shape, or whose colour, 
the shape of its parts or one or all of its manifest properties are beautiful, except 
that there exist in it certain minute features, such as the remaining parts of the 
form (if it is the form of an animal), or the presence of spots or maladjustment 
of parts and also their disproportion (if the form is that of an inanimate object): 
sight will perceive the manifest and beautiful properties of such an object, but 
not its minute features that render that form ugly, and thus will not obtain a 
true perception of that form. And if sight perceives an ugly object as beautiful, 
then it errs in regard to the object’s [perceived] beauty. 

hi 169b [212] Similarly, if the manifest properties of an object are ugly, but ( the 

minute ones are beautiful (such as the proportionateness of an animal’s 
members and their minute features, or the minute designs or different and 
proportionate colours 1 that may exist in inanimate objects), sight will per- 
ceive the form of such an object as ugly if the object is seen in air whose density 
exceeds the moderate range: for it will perceive the manifest and ugly features 
in that form but not the minute and beautifying ones. And if sight perceives a 
beautiful form as ugly, then it errs in regard to the [perceived] ugliness of the 
form. 

[213] Again, if sight perceives two objects that resemble one another in 
their manifest properties but differ in their subtle features, and if this percep- 
tion occurs through dense air such as fog or dust or smoke, then it will 
perceive their manifest properties but not their obscure features. And if the 
two objects resemble one another in their manifest properties, but differ in 
respect of the obscure ones, then sight will perceive the two objects to be 

ill 1-0 a similar and will not | attribute any difference to them. And if sight perceives 

two different objects as similar in every respect, then it errs in regard to the 
similarity [perceived] in them. 

[214] Similarly, if the two objects differ in respect of the manifest properties 
but agree in respect of the latent ones, sight will perceive them in dense air to 
be different and fail to sense their similarity. And if sight perceives two similar 
objects as dissimilar in every respect, then it errs in regard to the dissimilarity 
[perceived] in them. 

[ 215 ] Now errors in regard to beauty and ugliness and similarity and 
dissimilarity are errors in inference because these properties are perceived 
through inference, and because these errors are due only to sight’s reliance on 
the manifest properties and its acceptance of their conclusions. The cause of 
these errors is that the transparency of the air has exceeded the moderate range; 
for if such objects are viewed in a rarefied air of uniform transparency, sight 
will perceive each of them as it is, thus perceiving a beautiful or ugly 

iff 170b object as beautiful or ugly, | and similar or dissimilar objects as similar or 
dissimilar, without committing an error in regard to any of the object’s 


23 * 


346 


Optics 


properties, provided that the remaining properties in those objects are in the 
moderate range. 

[216] It is in these and similar ways, therefore, that sight may err in 
inference when the transparency of the air exceeds the moderate range. 

G. Errors of sight in inference 
when the duration of perception 
falls outside the moderate range 

G(i) 

[217] As to how sight errs in inference when the time during which it 
perceives the object falls outside the moderate range, [this can be shown as 
follows]. Let the sight glance from a distance at an object which stands upright 
on the surface of the ground, then immediately turn away from it; let that 
object be a palm or tree or column or wall; and let there be a mountain behind 
that object with a fairly large interval between them: upon glancing at such an 
object sight may take it to be adjacent to or near the mountain, thus failing to 
be aware of the interval between them, even if the distance of the object is a 

! moderately large one. For if sight casts a quick glance at the object and then 

1 t7u immediately turns away | from it, it may not notice the surface of the ground 

at the time of glancing at the two objects but merely look at the object along 
the line thatjoins them. But if it does not notice the surface of the ground, then 
it will not perceive the interval between the object and the mountain. And 
even if the beholder glances at the ground as a whole but does not move his 
sight over the whole extent of the interval, he will not discern the location of 
the base of the object within that interval. If, therefore, the beholder glances at 
the upright object, looking at it along the direct line [between them], and a 
mountain exists behind the object, sight will perceive that object to be 
adjacent to the mountain and will not be aware of the interval between them. 
But if sight perceives the object to be adjacent to that mountain while there is a 
fairly large interval between the object and the mountain, then it errs in regard 
to the distance of that object from it, and this will be an error in inference. The 
cause of this error is the shortness of the time during which sight perceives that 
object; for if sight confronts a ground surface of this description for an 
extended [interval of] time, and scans the interval 1 between the eye and the 
mountain, it will perceive the location of the object in that interval and thus 
1 171b perceive the distance | between the object and the mountain, and will not err in 
regard to the object’s distance from the mountain or from the eye, provided 
that the remaining properties in that object and that mountain and in the 
interval between the eye and the mountain are within the moderate range. 


{ 


III. 7 


347 


G(2) 

[218] Error may arise also in regard to the position of a visible object because 
the time [of perception] has fallen outside the moderate range. For let a 
fast-moving observer look right or left, thereby glancing at an upright wall or 
a mountain transversely placed at a fairly large distance; let sight perceive that 
wall or mountain through an opening or door, then let that wall or mountain 
disappear from view after the eye has passed through the width of that 
opening or door, and, further, let the surface [i.e. width] of that wall or the 
length [i.e. width] of that mountain be inclined to the radial lines: sight will 
not be aware of the position of that wall or mountain when perceived in this 
manner. If the surface of the wall or the length of the mountain is inclined to 
the radial lines, then sight will perceive them to be in a frontal position, 

ill 172a because obliquity | can be perceived only from perception of the inequality 
between the distances of the object’s extremities, and sight can perceive such 
inequality only from its perception of the magnitude of each of the distances of 
the two opposite extremities and from its perception of the excess of one of 
them over the other. 

[219] Now perception of the magnitude of each one of the distances and 
perception of the difference between them can only take place in a measurable 
interval of time during which the sight is able to contemplate both distances 
and compare them with each other and with objects lying along that distance 
on the ground. But the time during which the eye covers the width of the 
opening or door (assuming the opening or door to be narrow and the 
movement of the eye to be quick) must be short. And if that time is short, and 
the eye glances at that wall or mountain during that time or during part of it, 
then sight will not be able to contemplate the magnitudes of the distances of 
the two extremities and compare them with each other, even though it 
perceives the extremities of that body while glimpsing it. But if sight does not 
perceive the magnitude of each one of the distances of the wall’s or mountain’s 

in 172b extremities, and if it cannot | compare one of them with the other, then it will 
not perceive the obliqueness of that wall or mountain, especially if their 
obliqueness is slight. And if sight does not perceive their obliqueness,, then it 
must perceive the wall or mountain as frontal, and by failing to sense the 
inequality of the distances of their extremities will take those distances to be 
equal. 

[220] But if sight perceives an oblique object to be frontal then it errs in 
regard to the object’s position, and this will be an error in inference because 
position is perceptible through inference. The cause of this error is that the 
time during which sight perceives the object falls outside the moderate range; 
for when sight contemplates such an object for a long time, and contemplates 


Optics 


349 


34 # 

the distances of the object’s extremities, it perceives the inequality of these 
distances and thus perceives the position of the object as it is, provided that the 
other properties in the object are in the moderate range. 

G(3) 

[221] Error may also occur in regard to shape when the time [of perception] 
falls outside the moderate range. For if the eye glances at an object and then 
turns away from it, and there exists a slight convexity or concavity in the 

u surface of that object, | sight will in that instant perceive the surface to be 
plane, because slight convexity or concavity can be perceived only through 
thorough contemplation, and thorough contemplation must occupy an 
extended [interval of] time. But if sight perceives a convex or concave surface 
to be plane, then it errs in regard to the shape of that surface; and this will be an 
error in inference because shape is perceptible through inference. The cause of 
the error in the perception of such an object is the shortness of the time during 
which sight perceives the object; for when the time in which sight perceives an 
object is ample, it can perceive the convexity or concavity of the object's 
surface and thus perceive the surface's shape as it is, provided that the ocher 
properties in the object are in the moderate range. 

G(4) 

[222] Error may also occur in regard to size when the time [of perception] 
exceeds the moderate range. For let someone take a stick aflame at one of its 
ends, and let him quickly move it right and left in a dark night: looking at such 


that interval for an appreciable time that has a certain magnitude, namely the 


HI. 7 

time during which the motion of the flame is continued. And if sight perceives 
the flame as extended through a certain interval for a sensible period of time, 
then it will have no doubt that the flame has the same size as that interval’s 
length. If sight therefore perceives such a flame from a distance in the darkness 
of night, it will have no doubt that the size of the body of the flame is the same 
as the length of that interval (although the flame’s body is only a small part of 
that interval), and will thus err in regard to the size of that flame without being 
aware of its error. 

[224] Again, let sight perceive such a flame from close by while perceiving 
the flame’s mover and knowing that the flame is being moved by him and that 
the flame is small: sight will in this case also perceive the flame as extended 
through that interval, and perceive the magnitude of that interval’s length, but 
will also know that it is in error regarding what it perceives of the flame’s 
magnitude in this manner. 

in 174b [225] Therefore when sight perceives such a flame in this manner | it errs in 

regard to its size, shape and rest; for if sight has no previous knowledge of the 
flame’s being moved, it will take it to be at rest, and it will fail to sense that the 
flame is being moved if perception takes place in the darkness of night from a 
fairly large distance. Sight's error in regard to all these [properties] will be an 
error in inference because these properties are perceptible through inference. 
The cause of this error is that the time during which the flame is perceived to 
cover the length of this interval falls outside the moderate range; for if this 
same flame were to be gently moved, sight would correctly perceive its 
magnitude and would perceive it in one part after another of that interval, and 
also [correctly] perceive its movement and shape. Sight would thus make no 
error in regard to any of the flame’s properties, provided that the remaining 
properties, through which objects are correctly perceived by sight, are in the 
moderate range. 

G(5-7) 

[226] Error may also arise in regard to separation when the time [of 
perception] falls outside the moderate range. For let sight glance at a white 
garment or j curtain or wall; let a black or dark-coloured line or thread run 
upon that wall or through the weave of that garment or curtain; and let not the 
eye gaze upon that object but rather glance at it and immediately look away 
from it: the observer might take that line or thread to be a tear in that garment 
or curtain or wall if the time of glancing at it is too short to let the sight 
contemplate the object. And if the observer believes a line or thread to be a tear 
then it errs in this belief. 

[227] Error may also occur in regard to continuity owing to the shortness of 
the time [of perception]. For let sight glance at a wall which has been 


3b a flame sight will find it | extended through the interval along which it moves, 
which interval will be many times larger than the flame’s magnitude. For sight 
can perceive an object’s size or position or motion only after a measurable 
interval of time. When the flame moves extremely quickly, the time taken by 
the flame to cover that interval will be extremely short for the sense [-faculty] 
and, therefore, the sense [-faculty] will not be able to perceive the division of 
time during which the flame covers a part of that interval. And if the sentient 
fails to perceive the divisions of that time one after another, [namely those 
parts] during which the flame covers the parts of that interval one after Hi 175a 

another, then it will sense the whole of that time as an indivisible part of time, 
or as an instant. Sight will therefore perceive the flame throughout that 
[spatial] interval in a time which will be as an instant to the sense [-faculty]. 

[223] But if sight perceives the flame throughout the [spatial] interval in a 
single instant, then it will perceive it as extended through that interval. Then, 
as the motion of that flame is continued, always in the right-left direction, for 
4a a sensible period of time, sight will perceive the flame | as extended through 


Optics 


35i 


3 50 

blackened by smoke and in which one or more narrow cracks exist; and let the 
eye immediately turn away from such a wall after glancing at it without being 
1 able to contemplate it: sight will not in a glance discern the cracks in the wall 

nor distinguish between the blackness of the wall and the darkness of the 
,175b cracks within it. | And if sight fails to discern the cracks and the separation in 
such a body, then it will believe the body to be continuous. And if sight 
believes a discontinuous body to be continuous, then it errs in regard to the 
body’s [believed] continuity. 

[228] Again, let the eye glance at a couch made of black wood, such as 
ebony or the like, and let the gaps between the boards that join up to make the 
couch’s surface be narrow; further, let the eye not gaze upon this object but 
only glance at it and immediately look away from it: sight will not upon 
glancing at such a body perceive the gaps between its boards but perceive it as 
a single continuous body. For sight cannot in a brief glance discern the 
disjunctions and gaps between these boards because of the blackness of the 
boards and the darkness of the gaps between them and because of confusing 
darkness with blackness. 

[229] Now if sight perceives conjoined bodies to be a single continuous body, 
then it errs in regard to their perceived continuity; it also errs in regard to number 

1 - 6a when it believes a multitude ofbodies to be a single body. And errors | in regard 
to separation or continuity or number are errors in inference because these 
properties are perceived through inference. The cause of these errors is that the 
time during which these objects are perceived falls outside the moderate range; 
for when the obj ects described are perceived in such a way that the eye confronts 
them for some time and contemplates them well, sight correctly perceives their 
continuity or discontinuity and their number, provided that the remaining 
properties in those objects are within the moderate range. 

G(8) 

[230] Error may occur also in regard to motion owing to the shortness of the 
time [of perception]. For let the eye glance at two objects in motion at the same 
time, such as two horsemen in a fight or two persons advancing towards each 
other; let their motions be slightly unequal, and let the eye not gaze upon them 
but immediately turn away from them: sight will perceive two such objects to 
have equal motions and will not sense the inequality of their motions if the 

176b difference between them is small. | The reason is that sight can perceive the 
small difference between two motions only by a thorough contemplation that 
must occupy a time of some length, and not in the least amount of time, i. e. at a 
glance. 

[231] But if sight perceives two unequal motions to be equal, then it errs in 
regard to the equality [perceived] in them. And error in regard to motions and 


III. 7 

their equality is error in inference, because motions and their equality are 
perceived through inference. The cause of this error is that the time during 
which sight perceives two such motions falls outside the moderate range; for 
when sight perceives two unequally moving objects for an ample period ol 
time and thoroughly contemplates them during that time, it is able to perceive 
the inequality of their motions and suffers no error regarding the manner of 
those motions, provided that the remaining properties in those two objects are 
within the moderate range. 

G(9) 

[232] Error may arise also in regard to rest when the time [of perception] 
falls outside the moderate range. For let the eye look at a visible object that 

;ti 177a has | an extremely slow motion, and let the eye gaze upon that object for a 
short time only: sight will perceive that object at rest, whether the object’s 
motion is straight or circular, and even if the object is moderately distant. For 
if an object moves with an extremely slow motion, then it covers in a sensible 
time an insensible interval. If the eye looks at that object and remains fixed in 
front of the object for only that amount of time during which the object covers 
an insensible interval, or for part of that time, then it will not sense the interval 
covered by the object in that amount of time; and if it does not sense that 
interval, then it perceives the object to be at rest. 

[233] If, therefore, sight looks at an object in motion and only gazes upon it 
for a short time, then, assuming that the object’s motion is slow, and the 

ill 177b interval covered by the object during the time | in which it is perceived is 
small, sight will perceive that object to be at rest. For when sight perceives an 
object at the same place and in the same position for a sensible interval of time, 
it will perceive the object to be at rest during that time and fail to perceive the 
object’s motion during that interval of time; it is for this reason that sight 
perceives the stars to be stationary when it does not look at them for long. But 
error in regard to rest is error in inference, because rest is perceptible through 
inference. The cause of this error is that the time during which sight perceives 
such an object falls outside the moderate range; for when sight perceives an 
object and remains fixed upon that object for a measurable interval of time 
during which the object covers a sensible distance, it is able to perceive the 
object’s motion, provided that the remaining properties in that object are 
within the moderate range. 

[234] Sight may perceive an object in motion to be at rest also when the 
ill 178a motion | is extremely rapid. An example is a top which sight perceives to be at 

rest when it is moving extremely fast. 1 For sight will perceive every part of the 
top throughout the circle on which that part moves in an extremely small 
interval of time whose parts are not discernible by the sense. The reason is that 


L 


Optics 


353 


35 ^ 

when the top moves extremely fast, every part of it covers the circle on which 
it moves in an extremely short interval of time; and it has been shown earlier 
that sight can perceive motion only in a sensible interval of time. 

[235] But if the sight perceives every part of the top throughout the circle on 
which this part moves in the least amount of time (i.e. in a time that is as an 
instant to the sense), 1 and the motion of the top continues, then it will perceive 
the colour of every point on the top throughout the circumference of the circle 
on which that point moves during the time occupied by the top’s fast motion. 

178b Thus if | the top is all of one colour, its parts will not be distinguished by the 
sight. But if it has different colours (in the manner described in the Second 
Book), 1 then it will appear to have a single colour mixed of all those colours 
(as was shown in the Second Book). And if it appears to be of one colour, then 
its parts will not be distinguished during the rapid motion. If, however, it has 
a number of separate spots, or spots of a different colour from that of the top as 
a whole, then the colour of every spot will be visible throughout the 
circumference of the circle on which that spot moves, and that colour will 
endure as a uniform circle as long as the top continues to move quickly. The 
sight will perceive the top if circles of different colours from that of the rest of 
the top were drawn on its surface, because the sight will perceive the colour of 
the spot throughout the time occupied by the top's rapid motion upon the 
whole circumference of the circle. No matter how the top is coloured, 

179a therefore, provided that it moves rapidly, | the sight will perceive its colour or 
colours to be uniform and unchanged for a sensible interval of time, namely 
the time occupied by the rapid motion of the top. Now sight perceives circular 
motion from the succession of the parts of the moving object relative to the 
eye itself or to another body, and perceives rest from perceiving the object in 
the same condition and in the same position for a sensible interval of time. And 
if the sight perceives the top to be in the same condition for a sensible time, and 
perceives its parts to be in the same condition without sensing their succes- 
sion, then it will perceive the top to be stationary and fail to sense its 
movement. 

[236] But if sight perceives a moving top to be at rest, then it errs in regard 
to the rest [perceived], and this will be an error in inference. The cause of this 
error is that the time in which the eye perceives every part of the top 
throughout the circumference of the circle on which that part moves has fallen 

179b outside the moderate range by being exceedingly short. For when | this time is 
extremely short, the sense will not perceive its parts, nor, therefore, the parts of 
the motion. And if it fails to perceive the parts of the motion, then it will not 
perceive the succession of the parts of the top, nor, therefore, the top’s motion. 
The cause of this error is, therefore, the shortness of the time in which the sight 
perceives the moving object throughout the interval on which it moves. 


III. 7 

G(io~ii) 

[237] Error may also arise in regard to roughness and smoothness because of 
the shortness of duration [of perception]. For if the eye glances briefly at a 
slightly rough object then immediately looks away from it, sight will not 
perceive the slight roughness in the surface of that object because slight 
roughness can be perceived only by a thorough contemplation that must 
occupy a measurable interval of time. But when sight regards an object for a 
short interval of time it will not perceive the object’s roughness. And if it does 

ill 1 80a not, | then it will perceive the object’s surface to be smooth and consequently 
fail to distinguish between the object’s [rough] surface and smooth surfaces. 
Similarly, upon glancing briefly at a smooth object, sight will not ascertain its 
smoothness. If the object is one of those objects that might be rough and most 
of which are in fact so, then the sight may believe it to be rough when it does 
not ascertain that it is smooth. 

[238] Now if sight believes a rough object to be smooth, or a smooth one to 
be rough, then it errs in regard to the [believed] roughness or smoothness; and 
this will be an error in inference because roughness and smoothness are 
perceptible through inference. The cause of this error is that the time in which 
the sight perceives the object falls outside the moderate range; for when sight 
perceives such an object and contemplates it well for a measurable interval of 
time, it perceives the object’s roughness if it is rough or smoothness if it is 

hi 1 80b smooth, provided that the other properties in that object are within | the 
moderate range. 

G(i2-I3) 

[239] Error may also arise in regard to transparency and opacity when the 
duration of vision falls outside the moderate range. For let the eye glance 
briefly at a transparent body then turn away from it; let the light appear behind 
the object at the time of glancing at it so that the sight perceives its 
transparency; and let that visible light reach the object on lines inclined and not 
perpendicular to its surface: the sight will perceive the transparency of that 
object to be less than it is. For the real transparency of a transparent object can 
be perceived only if the light that appears behind the object is perpendicular to 
it. But if sight perceives the light behind the transparent object when that 
visible light reaches the object on oblique lines, then the apparent transparency 
of that object will not be its true transparency. Again, if the sight 

(Ui8ia glimpses | the transparent body in the position we have described, thus 
perceiving its transparency according to its position, then immediately turns 
away from it, the sight will fail to perceive the true position of the object in 
relation to the light that appears behind it and thus fail to distinguish in the 
short moment of glimpsing it between directly opposite and inclined light. 


354 


Optics 


355 


And if the sight fails to sense the true position of such an object relative to the 
light that appears behind it, then sight may believe the perceived transparency 
i of that body to be its maximum transparency. But if sight takes for the 

maximum transparency of a body one that is less than the body’s true 
transparency, then it errs in regard to the transparency of that body. 

[240] Now let the sight glance at a transparent body so placed on the ground 
that the light does not appear behind it, and let that body have a strong colour: 
the sight will perceive that body to be opaque and will neither sense its 
transparency nor distinguish at the moment of glimpsing it between its colour 
and that of the body lying behind it. And if the beholder had no previous 

1 18 1 b knowledge | of that object’s transparency, he will have no doubt regarding its 
opacity. But if sight perceives a transparent body to be opaque then it errs in 
regard to the object’s [perceived] opacity. And error in regard to transparency 
and opacity is error in inference, because transparency and opacity are 
perceived through inference. The cause of this error is that the duration [of 
perception] has fallen outside the moderate range; for when sight perceives a 
transparent object in such a way as to be able to contemplate it and look 
l through it, no error arises in regard to the object’s transparency or opacity, 

provided that the other properties of the object are within the moderate range. 

G(i4~ 15) 

[241] Error may also occur in regard to shadow and darkness owing to 
shortness of time. For let the eye glance at the wall of a chamber in a pitch-dark 
night; let one part of that wall be of a light colour and another of a dark colour, 
and let the light of a small fire fall upon that wall; further, assume that the 
observer had no previous knowledge of that wall, and let him briefly cast a 
look on the wall then immediately turn away from it: if at the time of 
glimpsing the wall he does not contemplate it well, then he may take the dark 
portion of the wall to be shaded. 

1 182a [242] Similarly, | if the wall is partly black and partly white, and it is viewed 

in daylight but the beholder had no previous knowledge of the wall’s 
blackness, and the light falling on the wall is not very bright, the sight may 
take the blackness to be a door or opening that is dark within, provided that it 
has not well contemplated that place but merely glanced at it. 

[243] Now if sight perceives as shaded or dark a place which is illuminated 
by the light of fire and in which no shadow exists, then it etrs regarding the 
[perceived] shadedness or darkness of that place. And this will be an error in 
inference because shadow and darkness are perceptible through inference. The 
cause of this error is that the time during which the sight has glimpsed such an 
object falls outside the moderate range; for when sight further contemplates 
such an object, it will perceive the light that is in the object and the difference 


III. 7 

between its colours and suffer no error regarding any aspect of the object, 

11 182b provided that the remaining properties in it are within the moderate range. ] 

G(i6-I9) 

[244] Error may also arise in regard to beauty and ugliness when the duration 
[of perception] falls outside the moderate range. For let the eye cast a glance at 
a visible object, e.g. a person who has a beautiful appearance owing to his 
delicate colour or the beautiful shape of his face as a whole or the shapes of his 
prominent members or of some of them; but let there be in that person some 
minute features that mar and disfigure his form, such as his other members or 
marks that disfigure the form of his face: upon glancing briefly at such a form 
and immediately turning away from it, the sight will grasp its beautiful traits 
at the time of glimpsing it but not its minute and detracting features, because 
such features cannot be perceived at a glance. By glancing at such an object, 
sight will therefore perceive it to be beautiful, although it is ugly. And the 
same is true of all visible objects (whether they are inanimate objects or 
animals or plants) when there exist in them manifest beautiful traits and 
minute ugly ones: if the eye glances at them without being able to contemplate 
them well, then it will perceive them to be beautiful although they are ugly, 
ill 183a [245] Similarly, if there exist in the object some manifest ugly features | and 

some minute beautiful ones, sight will upon glancing briefly at such objects 
perceive them to be ugly without perceiving their beautiful traits. And if sight 
perceives an ugly object to be beautiful, then it errs in regard to the object’s 
[perceived] beauty; and if it perceives a beautiful object to be ugly, then it errs 
in regard to the object’s [perceived] ugliness. 

[246] This same error arises when the eye looks through a door or opening 
across which the object moves, so that the object is seen during the time it 
takes to cover the width of that door or opening without being contemplated: 
the sight will [in these circumstances] perceive an ugly object (in the manner 
we have described) to be beautiful and a beautiful one to be ugly. And the case 
will be the same when the eye moves while the object remains at rest or moves 
in a direction opposite to that of the eye and the object is glimpsed during its 
motion across the door or opening. 

[247] Similarly , if the eye glances at two objects that resemble one another 
HI 183b in their manifest features but differ in their | subtle ones, and if sight does not 

contemplate them well but briefly glances at them then turns away from 
them, it will perceive those two objects as similar and will not sense their 
dissimilarity. And if they differ in their manifest traits but resemble one 
another in their obscure features, then sight will perceive them to be dissimilar 
and will not sense their similarity. But if sight perceives as totally similar two 


24 


Optics 


357 


356 

objects that differ in some respect then it errs in regard to their [perceived] 
similarity ; and if it perceives as totally different two objects that resemble one 
another in some respect then it errs in regard to the dissimilarity [perceived] in 
them. 

[248] Now errors in regard to beauty, ugliness, similarity and dissimilarity 
are errors in inference, because these properties are perceptible through 
inference. The cause of these errors is that the time in which each of these 
properties was perceived fell outside the moderate range; for when sight 
perceives these objects in such a way as to be able to contemplate them and 
inspect their properties, it correctly perceives every one of them, thus 
perceiving a beautiful object to be beautiful and an ugly one to be ugly, and 

84a perceiving as similar or dissimilar objects that are similar or dissimilar, | and 
will not therefore err in regard to any aspect of the visible objects, provided 
that their remaining properties are within the moderate range. 

[249] It is in these and similar ways, therefore, that sight errs in inference 
when the time in which it perceives the object falls outside the moderate 
range. 

H. Errors of sight in inference 
when the condition of the eye 
falls outside the moderate range 

H(i) 

[250] As to how sight errs in inference when the [condition of] sight falls 
outside the moderate range, [this can be shown as follows]. Let the viewing 
eye be afflicted by some illness or dim-sightedness, 1 or let it be originally 
weak-sighted; let it look at two somewhat distant and separate objects at equal 
distances [from it]; let one of the objects be pure white and the other 
dark-coloured, and let the light falling upon them be the same [in amount]: in 
these circumstances the sight may take the white object to be nearer to it than 
the dark-coloured one and take the latter to be farther. 2 [This will happen] 
even if the objects’ distances are moderate, though they are among the largest 

84b moderate distances, and especially if the objects are raised above the ground | 
and their distances are parallel to the ground-surface. For a weak sight is not 
capable of correctly perceiving what it sees, and the faculty of judgement is 
aware of this [defect] in a weak or diseased sight. Now sight can perceive the 
equality of two distances only from its perception of their magnitudes and 
from comparing one distance with the other, and thus it perceives the equality 
of distances as a result of an extended inference. 3 But a pure white object is 
more manifest than a dark-coloured one; and an object close to the eye is more 


III. 7 

manifest than one that is far from it; and the manifestness of the white object 
and inapparentness of the dark one are perceived by pure sensation; and what 
is perceived by pure sensation is clearer to the sense than what is perceived by 
inference. 

[251] Therefore, when sight perceives two such objects, their distances and 
the difference between their manifestness, it will be more impressed by the 
difference in manifestness which it perceives by pure sensation than by that 
which it perceives by inference, because the former is clearer and more assured 
with respect to the sense. And since the faculty of judgement is aware that 
what a weak sight perceives is incorrect, it will have more confidence in what 
is clearer to the sight and closer and prior to the sense, than in what is more 
remote from the sense and perceptible only after contemplation and infer- 
m 185a ence. | A weak sight will therefore perceive a pure white object to be nearer to 
it than a dark-coloured one (if the two objects are equally distant but the sight 
fails to ascertain the magnitude of their distances) because it perceives the 
former object to be more manifest and because it is more impressed by what is 
clearer to the sense. And if sight perceives two equally distant objects to be at 
unequal distances, then it errs in regard to both or one of their distances. 

[252J This same error may occur to a sound sight also when the two objects 
described are very far and the sight is unable to make sure of the magnitude of 
their distances. For if sight fails to ascertain the magnitude of the distances of 
two such objects, it will take the white object to be nearer because it is clearer. 

[253] And the same error may also arise in a sound sight at a moderate 
distance [from the two visible objects] if it does not notice the distance or does 
not ascertain its magnitude but briefly glances at the objects described and 
immediately turns away from them, assuming that they are perceived at night 
or in an obscure place. Error in regard to the distances of two such objects will 

ill 185b be an error in inference, because distance and the inequality of distances | can 
be perceived only by inference. The cause of this error, when it occurs in a 
sound sight, is the excessive distance or the weakness of the light or the 
shortness of the time. But if this error occurs in a weak eye, when the distance 
of the two objects is not excessively large and the remaining properties 
(through which the objects may be correctly perceived) are within the 
moderate range, then the cause will be the weakness of the sight. 

H(2) 

[254] Error may also arise in regard to position when [the condition of] sight 
falls outside the moderate range. For let a weak or defective eye look at a 
visible object whose surface is inclined to the radial lines; let the object be 
raised above the surface of the ground and let its inclination be small: the sight 
will not sense the object’s inclination, even if its distance [from the eye] is 


Optics 


359 


358 

parallel to the ground-surface, but rather perceive it as frontal. For sight 
perceives obliquity only from its perception of the difference between the 
distances of the object’s extremities; but if the object is raised above the 
ground and its obliquity is small, then the sight will perceive that difference 
1 1 86a only as a result of extended inference 1 1 and subtle and thorough con- 
templation, because the said difference will not be apparent to the sense when 
the obliquity is small. A weak sight does not, however, perceive the subtle 
features in an object, being capable of perceiving only what is manifest. Only 
rarely will it perceive that difference in the case of a slightly oblique object, 
even if it perceives the surface of the ground parallel to the object’s distance. A 
1 sound eye is capable of perceiving this state of affairs only after a thorough 

contemplation but may still err in regard to the object’s obliquity. A weak 
sight will not therefore perceive the object’s obliquity if the obliquity is small 
and the object is raised above the ground, and it will therefore perceive such 
objects as frontally placed. 

[255] Now if sight perceives an oblique object to be frontally placed then it 
errs in regard to the object’s position. As a result of this error the sight may 
take the magnitude of the object perceived in this manner to be other than it is. 
For when sight [correctly] perceives the object’s obliquity, it perceives the 

1 86b object’s magnitude to be greater than | that of a frontally-placed object 
subtending an angle equal to that subtended by the oblique object. Thus if 
sight fails to sense the obliquity of an object and takes the object to be frontally 
placed, it will perceive the object’s size to be equal to that of a frontal object 
subtending an angle equal to that angle, and will therefore perceive the 
object’s magnitude to be less than its true magnitude. 

H(3) 

[256] Error may also occur in regard to the object’s shape when the 
[condition of] sight falls outside the moderate range. For a weak sight is not 
able to perceive the small corners and ridges that may exist in a visible object. 
And if it fails to perceive them then it will perceive the object’s shape to be 
other than it is and thus err in regard to the object’s shape. Again, a weak sight 
cannot perceive- the slight convexity or concavity that may exist in a visible 
object. And if it fails to perceive such convexity or concavity then it errs in 
regard to the shape of that surface. 

H(4-5) 

[257] Error may also arise in regard to separation and continuity because of the 

187a weak [condition] or deterioration of the sight. For a | weak or defective sight is 

not able to perceive the form of an object correctly. Thus it may take the black 
or dark-coloured lines that exist in the surface of an object to be cracks in that 


III. 7 

surface. If these lines run across the whole width of that body, the sight may 
believe the object to be plural in accordance with the number of those lines, 
believing the black lines to be separations between those bodies. Similarly, a 
weak or defective sight will fail to perceive the inapparent separation that 
exists between bodies that have been joined together. And if it fails to perceive 
such a separation, then it will perceive those bodies as a single continuous 
body and thus err in regard to both the [perceived] continuity and number. 

H( 6 ) 

[258] Error may also occur in regard to number in another way when the eye 
suffers from a squint that causes it to be outside the moderate range. For when 

ill 187b a viewer having a squint 1 in one | or both eyes looks at visible objects, he will 
in most cases perceive a single object to be two , especially if the squint exists in 
one eye. For a squint is a change of the position of the eye; and if one eye 
deviates from the natural position and the viewer looks at a single object with 
both eyes, there will meet at that object rays of differing positions, and not 
those that generally are similarly situated. And it was shown in Chapter 1 of 
this Book that when differently situated rays fall on an object, the latter will be 
seen as double, because the object’s form will occur in two positions that are 
differently situated with respect to the two eyes and will reach two different 
positions at the place of last sensation, 2 and therefore the form of the object 
will be doubled at the place of last sensation, 2 and in consequence of this the 
single object will be seen as two. 

[259] Thus if the viewer has a squint in one eye and the other is sound he 
in 188a will | in most cases perceive a single object as two. If the squint exists in both 

eyes and their positions differ, their condition will be the same as when the 
squint is in one eye. If the squint is in both eyes and they are similarly 
positioned, but their position suffers a change when moved, then they will in 
most cases perceive a single object as double. For if the position of the eyes is 
not the natural one, then it will not always be the same [in both of them] 
during their motion, but will sometimes be similar and sometimes differ 
because their orientation (when their position is not the natural one) will lack 
stability and therefore the eyes will not always maintain similar positions. 

[260] When looking at a number of visible objects at the same time, a person 
with a squint will therefore perceive every one of them, or one or more of 

ui 188b them, as two, | and this will in most cases be the condition of such a person. 

But if sight perceives the visible objects in this manner, taking each or some or 
a single one of them to be double, then it errs in regard to their number. For, 
when a squint exists, and vision is effected with both eyes, the sight will 
always err in regard to the number of the visible objects. Now errors in regard 
to position, shape, magnitude, separation, continuity and number are errors 


i- 


Optics 


360 

in inference, because these properties are perceived through inference. The 
cause of these errors (when they occur in the manner we have described) is the 
impairment of sight; for a sound sight does not err in regard to any of these 
properties if the remaining properties in such objects are within the moderate 
range. 

H(7) 

[261] Error may also occur in regard to motion when [the condition of] the 
sight falls outside the moderate range. For if someone turns himself quickly 

[89a round many times, then stops, he sees all perceptible objects about him | 
turning, though they are stationary. This occurs to him because the spirit that 
happens to be in the eye moves in its own place and turns and undulates 1 when 
the person turns round; then, when that person stops after this rapid turning, 
the motion will persist for a while in the visual spirit, just as motion persists in 
a body which has been moved round and then released. For when someone 
turns a body round then lets go of it, the motion will remain in it for a while, 
so that the body will move not by a mover but by virtue of what has come to 
| exist in it as a result of being [initially] moved by the mover, as in the case of 

the [spinning] top and the like. Similarly, the motion will remain in the visual 
spirit for a while after the person has stopped turning round. And as long as 
the motion remains, the beholder will see the visible objects as if they were in 
motion and revolving; then when the motion in the visual spirit ceases, the 
189b revolution seen in those objects will come to a stop. | This is what happens to 
vision when a man suffers the illness called ‘vertigo’. 2 

[262] When, therefore, a man turns round very fast, or when he suffers the 
illness called ‘vertigo’, the visual spirit comes to have a circular motion. And 
when the visual spirit acquires such a morion after being at rest, then it exceeds 
its limit of temperateness. And when the spirit acquires a circular motion and 
is not in its natural state of rest it perceives the visible objects as if they moved 
with a rapid circular motion, because the forms of the visible object will in this 
case successively exist in the parts of the moving spirit, and this succession will 
be circular owing to the circular motion of the visual spirit. And when the 
form moves through the parts of the visual spirit in a circle, its motion will be 
like that of an object having a circular motion through the parts of the visual 
spirit (assuming the latter to be at rest) — for the form of a circularly moving 
object will have a circular movement through the parts of the visual spirit. 

190a Therefore, the perception | of stationary objects as having a circular move- 
ment when [the viewer] turns fast or when [he is] under the influence of the 
illness called ‘vertigo’, is due only to the movement of the visual spirit and the 
movement of the forms of objects through the parts of the visual spirit as a 
result of the latter’s motion. 


361 


III. 7 

[263] Now if sight (after turning round or under the influence of vertigo) 
perceives stationary objects as moving, then it errs in regard to the movement 
perceived in those objects. And this will be an error in inference because 
movement is perceived by inference. The cause of this error is that [the 
condition of] the sight falls outside the moderate range; for a sound eye does 
not perceive any object to be moving in this manner if the other properties in 
those objects are in the moderate range. 

H(8) 

[264] Error may also occur in regard to rest because of sight’s weakness or 
deterioration. For if the object has a circular motion, and it is of one colour and 
a circular shape, and the parts of its surface are uniform, then an impaired sight 

in 190b will not perceive its circular movement even if that movement j is slow. For 
sight perceives circular movement only through succession of the parts of the 
moving object in relation to the eye or to another body, or through relating 
one part of the moving object to other bodies. But if the moving object has a 
circular shape and its surface is of the same colour and form, then a sound sight 
will perceive the parts of the object and their succession only after intense and 
thorough contemplation, assuming that the motion is slow. 

[265] But if the motion of such an object is rapid or very rapid, then even a 
sound sight will not be able to perceive it. For if the object is of the same form, 
then neither its parts nor their succession will be apparent to a sound sight 
except after intense and thorough contemplation through which the minute 
parts of that object can be perceived. But sight will not perceive the circular 
motion if it cannot discern the parts of the object. Thus if the sight is impaired 
and the parts of the object are uniform, then it will not discern the object’s 

in 191a parts. | And if the sight fails to discern them, and the parts of the object are 
similar, then it will not perceive the succession of the object’s parts or their 
coming into line with other objects. And if sight fails to perceive the parts of 
the moving object or their succession, then it will not perceive the object’s 
movement if the latter is circular and the object remains in one place. 

[266] This error will always occur to a weak sight that looks at a rotating 
millstone, for all these conditions are present in the millstone. For a sound eye 
perceives the movement of a millstone from perception of the succession of 
the parts of the millstone, and this perception is only due to perception of its 
small parts. A weak sight cannot, however, perceive the movement of the 
millstone, if the latter’s parts are uniform, because it will fail to perceive those 
small parts and their succession. If, therefore, a weak or defective sight looks 
at a moving or revolving millstone it will perceive it to be at rest, and will thus 

in 191b err in regard to | the millstone’s [perceived] rest. And this will be an error in 
inference because rest is perceived through inference. The cause of this error 


Optics 


363 


362 

will be impairment of sight; for a sound sight will perceive the movement of the 
millstone as it is, provided that the other properties in the stone are within the 
moderate range. 

H(9-i2) 

[267] Error may also occur in regard to roughness , smoothness , transparency and 
opacity when [the condition of] the sight falls outside the moderate range. For a 
weak or defective sight cannot perceive the minute features that may exist in the 
object. Thus if a slight roughness exists in the object, a weak sight will fail to 
perceive it. And if sight fails to perceive the roughness existing in the surface of 
the visible object, then it will believe that surface to be smooth; and if it perceives 
a rough object to be smooth, then it errs in regard to the smoothness 
[perceived]. 

[268] Similarly, if a weak sight looks at a smooth object, and the object 
resembles one of the rough objects known (together with their roughness) to 
the beholder, then it may believe that smooth object to be rough. And if sight 
believes a smooth object to be rough then it errs in regard to the object’s 
[perceived] roughness. 

[269] Similarly, if a weak or defective sight looks at | a very transparent object 
in which some opacity none the less exists, then it will not correctly perceive the 
object’s transparency. For the sight, owing to its weakness, will perceive the 
slight opacity in that object to be denser than it is. And if sight perceives the 
opacity of that object to be denser than it is, then it will perceive the object’s 
transparency to be less than it is. And if sight perceives the object’s transparency 
to be less than it is, then it errs in regard to the object’s [perceived] transparency. 

[270] And if the transparency of the object is slight, and the object has a 
strong colour, then a weak or defective sight will not perceive the trans- 
parency of that object, for only a sound sight can perceive slight transparency. 
But if a weak sight fails to perceive the slight transparency existing in an 
object, then it will liken the object to similar opaque objects that have that 
colour. And if sight perceives a transparent object as opaque then it errs in 
regard to the object’s [perceived] opacity. 

[271] Now errors in regard to roughness, | smoothness, transparency or 
opacity in the manners we have described are errors in inference because these 
properties are perceived through inference. The cause of these errors in these 
manners is the weakness of sight and its distempered condition; for a sound 
sight perceives all these properties as they are, provided that the other 
properties in the visible objects are within the moderate range. 

H(i 3 -I 4) 

[272] Error may also arise in regard to shadow when [the condition of] the 
sight falls outside the moderate range. For when light shines upon an object 


III. 7 

which is partly of a light colour and partly of a dark or dull colour, 1 the form of 
the light on the surface of that object will vary owing to the difference of the 
colours in the object. If a weak sight looks at such an object it may take the dull 
or dark portions to be shadows on account of the subdued light that is in them. 
But when sight imagines an illuminated and unshaded object to be shaded 

III 193a then it errs in regard to the imagined | shadow. 

[273] Similarly, if a weak sight looks at walls some parts of which are black 
and some white, and all are illuminated with a moderate light, it may take the 
black portions to be unlighted. And if it believes a black wall to be in the dark 
then it errs in regard to the darkness believed. 

[274] Now errors in regard to shadow and darkness are errors in inference 
because shadow and darkness are perceived through inference. The cause of 
these two errors in the manner we have described is the impairment of the 
sight; for a sound sight is able to perceive such objects as they are and makes no 
error regarding them provided that the other properties in these objects are in 
the moderate range. 

H(i5-i8) 

[275] Error may also arise in regard to beauty and ugliness and in regard to 
similarity and dissimilarity when [the condition of] the sight falls outside the 
moderate range. For if the manifest properties of an object are beautiful but 

m 193b there exist in it some minute ugly features, | a weak sight will perceive that 
object to be beautiful, because a weak sight is able to perceive the manifest 
properties but not the minute ones. Similarly, if the manifest properties of the 
object are ugly and there exist in it minute beautiful features that beautify its 
form, a weak or defective sight will perceive such an object to be ugly and fail 
to sense its beauty, because it will perceive the manifest properties that make 
the object look ugly but not the minute features that make it look beautiful. 

[276] Again, let a weak or defective sight look at two objects that resemble 
one another in their manifest properties but differ in their subtle features: sight 
will perceive two such objects to be similar and fail to sense their dissimilarity. 
Similarly, if the two objects differ in their manifest properties and resemble 
one another in their subtle features, a weak or defective sight will perceive two 

in [94a such objects | to be different and fail to sense their similarity. 

[277] Now if sight perceives as beautiful in all respects an object that is ugly 
in some respect then it errs in regard to the object’s [perceived] beauty. And if 
it perceives as ugly in all respects an object that is beautiful in some respect 
then it errs in regard to the object’s [perceived] ugliness. Again, if it perceives 
as similar in all respects two objects that differ from one another in some 
respect then it errs in regard to the similarity [perceived] in them. And if it 
perceives as different in all respects two objects that resemble one another in 


Optics 


364 

some respect then it errs in regard to the difference [perceived] in them. But 
errors in regard to beauty, ugliness, similarity and dissimilarity are errors in 
inference, because these properties are perceived by inference, and because 
they are due to the sight's reliance on the manifest properties alone and its 
acceptance of their conclusion. The cause of these errors in the manners we 
have described is that [the condition of] the sight has fallen outside the 
moderate range; for a sound sight is able to perceive all these properties as they 
are, provided that the other properties in the visible objects (through which 

194b the objects can be correctly perceived) are within | the moderate range. 

[278] It is, therefore, in these and similar manners that sight may err in 
inference when [the condition of] the sight falls outside the moderate range. It 
is clear from all that we have shown in detail in all of the foregoing chapters 
how the error of sight in inference depends on each of the causes on account of 
which visual error may arise in regard to all properties perceived by inference. 

[Conclusion on the errors of sight in inference] 

| [279] We have now completed our classification of all kinds of visual error 

and enumerated all causes on account of which sight may err. We have also 
provided each of the kinds of error with an example taken from existing 
situations to show how the error comes about. All the errors that we have 
mentioned are examples only of the ways in which visual error occurs; they do 
not make up the sum of visual errors, but rather each of the examples we have 
supplied is like a species of errors. The errors of vision are many, but they are 
all subsumed under the species we have set out in detail, and they all divide 
into the examples we have produced. The causes of all visual errors in general, 
and of all their species and divisions, are those which we have enumerated, 
there being no errors beyond [those induced by] the eight causes which have 
been detailed. 

195a [280] All the | errors we have mentioned are but examples of the errors that 

have individual causes and for each of which there exists a>single cause among 
those enumerated as being responsible for visual error. But sight may err as a 
result of the combination of two, three or more of the causes we have 
mentioned. When this happens the error will be compounded. For example, 
let the eye glance from a great distance at an object moving along a straight and 
transverse interval, but let the motion not be extremely rapid. Upon glancing 
briefly at such an object and turning away from it, the sight will not perceive 
the object as moving during that brief interval of time although it may be able 
to perceive the [same] motion in an equal time from a closer position. For if the 
interval covered by the moving object in the short period of time lies at a short 
distance from the eye, and the object's motion is not extremely slow, then the 


HI. 7 365 

sight will be able to perceive it from that distance and during that interval of 
time, provided that that interval is not extremely short. And if sight perceives 
the interval covered by a moving object in a brief interval of time then it will 
perceive the motion of that object in the short period of time. But if the 
interval covered by the moving object in the short period of time is very 

m 195b distant [from the eye], then the sight may not truly perceive that | interval 
from that great distance. 

[281] And if the sight does not perceive from a great distance the interval 
covered by the moving object in the short period of time, then it will not 
perceive the movement of that object during that time and from that great 
distance. And if so, then it will believe that moving object to be stationary 
and, therefore, will be in error regarding the object's [believed] rest. The cause 
of this error is both the excessively great distance and the short time; for if the 
sight is fixed upon that object from a very great distance and for an ample 
period of time during which the object covers a measurable interval, it will 
perceive the object's motion from that great distance. If the object is close to 
the eye, the sight will be able to perceive the object's motion in the short 
period of time, provided that the object covers in that short period a certain 
interval which is visible from that short distance. That being so, the cause of 
the sight's perception of the moving object from the great distance and in the 

in 196a short time as being at rest cannot be | the excessively great distance alone or the 
short time alone but these two in combination. 

[282] Again, let a variously coloured object move in a circle; let the motion 
be rapid but not extremely rapid, and let this object be in an obscure but not 
extremely dark place: glancing at this object from a short distance sight will at 
once perceive its motion on account of its various colours and its nearness, 
because sight is able to perceive the rapid succession of the parts of such an 
object provided that it is close to the eye. Then, as the eye recedes from the 
object until they are at a fairly large distance from each other, sight will upon 
glancing briefly at that same object from the long distance fail to perceive the 
object's motion on account of the excessively great distance between them and 
because of the darkness or obscurity of the place and the shortness of the time 
occupied by the glance. For the arc covered by every part of the circularly 

Hi 196b moving object in a short period oftime | will be small, and if that arc is small and 

if the light on the obj ect is scanty and the distance between it and the eye is great, 
then the sight will not in the span of a brief glance perceive that small arc. 

[283] If, however, the sight is fixed upon such an object for an extended 
period of time and thoroughly contemplates the object, then it will perceive 
the object’s movement from a great distance, because the arc covered by the 
moving object in an extended period of time will be fairly large and the sight 
will therefore be able to perceive it from a large distance even in an obscure but 


Optics 


197a 


197b 


[98a 


366 

not very dark place. If the light in that place becomes stronger and the eye 
glances at the object from that distance at which its motion was not perceived 
at first, sight will be able to perceive the strongly illuminated object; because 
the small arc covered by the moving object in the duration of the glance 
(which arc was not perceptible owing to the dimness of the light, the excessive 
distance and the short time) will be perceived in the presence of the strong 
light, when its distance from the eye | is [still] large and the time [of 
perception] is short; for small objects that cannot be seen in obscure places will 
be visible in the presence of strong light from the same distances and in the 
same intervals of time during which they were not perceptible in the obscure 
places. 

[284] Therefore, when the sight glances at a rotating object from a great 
distance and in dim light without perceiving the object’s movement, then it 
will believe the object to be at rest. But if sight believes the object to be at rest 
while the object is in motion, then it errs in regard to the movement 
[believed]. The cause of this error is the excessively large distance together 
with the shortness of time and the dimness of light, because sight will perceive 
the motion of that object in the presence of [only] two of these causes. Thus it 
will perceive the motion at the moment of glancing at the object, and in dim 
light, provided that the object is glimpsed from a short distance; and it will 
perceive the motion from a great distance if it gazes upon the object for a short 
interval of time; and it will perceive the motion from a great distance, and at 
the moment of glimpsing the object, if the light in the object is strong. 

[285] That being so, the cause on account of which the sight perceives such 
an object | in motion to be at rest, in the manner we have described, is the 
combination of the three causes we have described, and not the presence of a 
single one or the combination of [only] two of them. It is therefore clear from 
what we have said that visual error may be due to the combination of two or 
more of the causes on account of which sight may err; and thus sight may err 
because of one cause or more; but all causes (whether one or many) on account 
of which visual error may occur, must be among the eight causes we have set 
out in detail. 

[286] The errors of sight in regard to the particular properties are, therefore, 
in accordance with what we have illustrated with respect to all kinds of error. 
Now the forms of all visible objects are composed of the particular properties. 
Therefore, if sight makes an error in regard to one or more of the particular 
properties in a visible object, then it errs in regard to the form of that object. 
And if sight errs in regard to the form of an object, then it will have erred in 
regard to one or more of the particular properties in the form of that object. 
Sight makes no | error in regard to what it perceives of the form of a visible 
object except the error it may make in regard to one or several of the particular 


HI. 7 367 

properties in that object, for sight perceives of visible objects only their 
particular properties. Similarly, if sight errs in recognizing an object, this will 
be due only to an error in likening the properties in that object (or some of 
them) to what it knows of the properties it formerly perceived in that same 
object or in other objects of the same kind. 

[287] All errors in regard to the particular properties must be errors in pure 
sensation, or in recognition, or in inference, or else errors in all of these three 
together or in two kinds of them in combination. There are no visual errors in 
regard to the particular properties that fall outside these divisions. Therefore 
the errors of sight in regard to all that is subject to error in the forms of visible 

in 198b objects may be errors in pure sensation, or errors in recognition, or errors | in 
inference; or else they may be errors in all three kinds combined, or in two 
kinds of them combined. Sight is not subject to any error in regard to the form 
of an object that falls outside these divisions. And all errors of the three kinds 
we have mentioned are due only to visual error in regard to the particular 
properties in the forms of objects. 

[288] It has, therefore, been shown that all errors of sight in regard to all the 
particular properties are due only to one or more of the causes which we have 
enumerated. All errors in regard to all that sight perceives of the forms of 
visible objects, or in regard to any single particular property in these forms, 
fall into the divisions which we have detailed. These errors arise in the sight in 
the ways we have illustrated, and their causes all come under those we have 
enumerated. It is time we brought this Book to an end. 

[289] End of the Third Book 
of Abu 'All al-Hasan ibn al-Hasan ibn al-Haytham 
in 199a | on Optics. 

Transcription of this Book was completed on the eve of 
Sunday the eleventh of Sha'ban 
of the year six and seventy and four hundred. 

Praise be to God alone, 

and His blessings and peace upon our master Muhammad 
and upon his family. 


THE OPTICS 
OF 

IBN AL-HAYTHAM 

BOOKS I-III 
ON DIRECT VISION 


II 

INTRODUCTION, COMMENTARY, GLOSSARIES, 
CONCORDANCE, INDICES 


STUDIES OF THE WARBURG INSTITUTE 
EDITED BY J. B. TRAPP 
VOL. 40, ii 



L 



THE OPTICS 
OF 

IBN AL-HAYTHAM 

Books I-III 
On Direct Vision 

Translated with Introduction 
and Commentary 
by 

A. I. SABRA 

Harvard University 

II 

INTRODUCTION, COMMENTARY, GLOSSARIES, 
CONCORDANCE, INDICES 


LONDON 

THE WARBURG INSTITUTE 
UNIVERSITY OF LONDON 
1989 





© THE WARBURG INSTITUTE, 1989 
ISBN o 85481 072 2 



The Warburg Institute gratefully acknowledges the generous financial 
assistance of the Sabah al-Salem al-Mubarak al-Sabah Foundation, Kuwait, 
in the publication of these volumes. 


CONTENTS 


PART I 

Translation of the Optics oflbn al-Haytham 
Books I— III: On Direct Vision 


BOOK I. ON THE MANNER OF VISION IN GENERAL Page 

Chapter i . Preface to the [whole] book 3 

Chapter 2. Inquiry into the properties of sight .... 6 

Chapter 3. Inquiry into the properties of lights and into the 

manner of radiation of lights . . . 13 

Chapter 4. On the effect oflight upon sight . 51 

Chapter 5. On the structure of the eye . 55 

Chapter 6. On the manner of vision . ..... 63 

Chapter 7. On the utilities of the instruments of sight 100 

Chapter 8. On the reasons for the conditions without the 

combination of which vision is not effected 104 

BOOK II. ON THE VISIBLE PROPERTIES, THEIR CAUSES AND THE MANNER OF 
THEIR PERCEPTION 

Chapter 1. Preface 113 

Chapter 2. On distinguishing the lines of the ray . . 114 

Chapter 3. On the manner of perceiving each of the particular 

visible properties . . .126 

Perception of Light and Colour . 142 

Perception of Distance . . 149 

Perception of Position . . . 158 

Perception of Solidity . . 168 

Perception of Shape ...... 171 

Perception of Size ...... 173 

Perception of Separation . . 191 

Perception of Continuity ..... 192 

Perception of Number ..... 192 

Perception of Motion 193 

Perception of Rest ...... 196 

Perception of Roughness . . .196 

Perception of Smoothness . . . .197 

Perception of Transparency .198 


Contents 


viii 


Perception of Opacity 199 

Perception of Shadow . 199 

Perception of Darkness ..... 200 

Perception of Beauty ..... 200 

Perception of Ugliness ..... 206 

Perception of Similarity ..... 207 

Perception of Dissimilarity .... 207 

Chapter 4. On distinguishing [the ways in which] sight 

perceives visible objects 207 

BOOK III. ON ERRORS OF DIRECT VISION AND THEIR CAUSES 

Chapter 1. Preface ......... 227 

Chapter 2. On what needs to be advanced for clarifying the 

discussion on errors of sight ..... 228 

Chapter 3. On the causes of errors of sight . .250 

Chapter 4. On distinguishing errors of sight .... 258 

Chapter 5. On the ways in which sight errs in pure sensation . 262 

Chapter 6. On the ways in which sight errs in recognition . 267 

Chapter 7. On the ways in which sight errs in inference . . 277 

A. Errors of sight in inference when the distance of the 

visible object falls outside the moderate range 278 

B. Errors of sight in inference when the position of the 

visible object falls outside the moderate range . 303 

C. Errors of sight in inference when the illumination in the 

visible object falls outside the moderate range 315 

D. Errors of sight in inference when the size of the visible 

object falls outside the moderate range . . 324 

E. Errors of sight in inference when the opacity of the 

visible object falls outside the moderate range 332 

F. Errors of sight in inference when the transparency of the 

air falls outside the moderate range . 340 

G. Errors of sight in inference when the duration of percep- 

tion falls outside the moderate range 346 

H. Errors of sight in inference when the condition of the eye 

falls outside the moderate range . . .356 


PART II 

Frontispiece. Frontispiece to F. Risner, Opticae Thesaurus , 1572 


PREFACE 


xi 


Contents 


IX 


ABBREVIATIONS xvi 

INTRODUCTION 

I. Sources for the life and works of Ibn al-Haytham . xix 

II. Ibnal-Haytham’s writings on light and vision . . xxxii 

III. Aim and scope of the Optics ...... liii 

IV. The T anqih al-Mana%ir ot Kamal al-DIn al-FarisI lxiv 

V. The medieval Latin translation of the Optics and Risner’s 

edition of 1572 lxxiii 

VI. Manuscripts of Kitab al-Mand^ir ..... Ixxx 

VII. Edition of the Arabic text and English translation of the 

Optics , Books I— II— III lxxxiii 

VIII. Synopsis of the Optics, Books I— II— III . lxxxvii 

COMMENTARY 

Book I 3 

Plates 1-4 following p. 42 

Book II 62 

Book III .......... 106 

ARABIC-LATIN GLOSSARY 1 44 

LATIN-ARABIC GLOSSARY 173 

CONCORDANCE OF THE ARABIC AND LATIN TEXTS 205 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 21 3 

INDEX OF MANUSCRIPTS CITED . - 22 9 

GENERAL INDEX 2 3* 



PREFACE 


The Optics of Ibn al-Haytham had a chequered history in which undeserved 
misfortune overlapped with unexpected good luck. Until the book was 
composed in the second quarter of the eleventh century a.d. no far-reaching 
developments in the study of light and vision had occurred since Ptolemy 
produced his Optica in the second century. Ibn al-Haytham pushed the subject 
a decisive step forward, but, for obscure reasons, his book remained virtually 
unknown or unutilized in the Islamic world until the very end of the thirteenth 
century. It was then rediscovered by a brilliant mathematician working in 
north-western Iran, Kamal al-Din al-Farisi, who wrote a substantial com- 
mentary on it. In the late twelfth or, at the latest, in the early thirteenth 
century, however, the book had already found its way to Europe and, in a 
Latin translation known as Perspectiva or De aspectibus , had begun to exert 
profound influence on thirteenth-century European thinkers. That it should 
have succeeded in making this journey at a time when it had hardly made an 
impression among Arabic-reading scholars in the Islamic world must have 
been largely due to chance. Once rendered into Latin, however, and com- 
pared with other optical writings, including Ptolemy’s treatise which had 
become available in the same language at about the same time, Ibn al- 
Haytham ’s work was quickly and widely recognized as the most complete 
and most advanced work on its subject. It thus became the major (and usually 
acknowledged) source of the extensive and subsequently influential writings 
on light and vision by Roger Bacon, Witelo and John Pecham. There is also 
evidence from more than one field of inquiry that the influence of the 
Perspectiva continued into the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. The empi- 
ricist theory of knowledge developed in great detail in Book II clearly 
appealed to fourteenth-century philosophers such as Ockham and Oresme; 
and a fourteenth-century Italian translation of the full Latin text attracted the 
attention of at least one Renaissance artist concerned with the theory of visual 
aesthetics — Lorenzo Ghiberti. Then, in 1572, Friedrich Risner’s edition of the 
medieval Latin translation appeared at Basel. This event was not as surprising 
as the original act of translation; and, thanks to this edition, the Perspectiva , 
now called Alhazeni Optica , became more easily and more directly accessible 
to mathematicians in the late sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, such as 
Willebrord Snellius, Johannes Kepler, Rene Descartes, Isaac Barrow, Rene- 
Fran^ois de Sluse and Christiaan Huygens. Most of these made significant use of 
various parts of the book, especially its sophisticated mathematical treatment of 
optical problems. Clearly, the Optics oflbn al-Haytham belongs as much to the 
history of Latin medieval and early modern science as it does to the history of 
science in medieval Islam. This fact has recently been emphasized and fruitfully 


xn Preface 

examined by Vasco Ronchi, David C. Lindberg and Graziella Federici Vesco- 
vini, among others. 

Latin manuscripts of Ibn al-Haytham’s Optics had rendered the author’s 
name in various forms: Alhacen filius Alhaycan, Hacen filius Hucayn filius 
Haycen, Achen filius Hucaym fdius Aycen, for example. Whatever name 
Risner found in the two manuscripts he used for his edition he replaced by 
‘Alhazen’, which obviously corresponds to Ibn al-Haytham’s first name, 
‘al-Hasan’. The title page of Risner’s volume identified Alhazen as an Arab 
(just as it identified ‘Vitello’, whose own Perspectiva was included in the same 
volume, as a Pole). But who was ‘Alhazen’, and exactly when and where did 
he live? Although the correct identification with ‘Ibn al-Haytham’ was made 
more than once by European scholars in the first decades of the nineteenth 
century, it was not until Enrico Narducci published the results of his research 
in 1871, and Eilhard Wiedemann was able, in 1876, to make a detailed 
comparison of Risner’s text with Kamal al-Din’s commentary in a Leiden 
manuscript, that it became widely known and accepted that Risner’s Alhazen 
was none other than Abu 'All al-Hasan ibn al-Hasan ibn al-Haytham, the 
mathematician and astronomer who originated in Iraq and who was active in 
Cairo in the first half of the eleventh century and otherwise known from the 
biographies found in Ibn al-Qifti and Ibn Abl U$aybi'a. Wiedemann’s subse- 
quent studies of Ibn al-Haytham’s optical writings, which he based on the 
texts paraphrased by Kamal al-DIn and on other Arabic manuscripts held in 
European libraries, have hitherto been the main source of information in the 
West on Ibn al-Haytham’s work in this field. Several of these studies are still 
useful today. Wiedemann, however, was not aware of the existence of 
manuscript copies of the Arabic Optics, Kitab al-Manazir , and he never used 
any of them in the numerous monographs he published between 1876 and 
1928. 

It was only at the end of the last century and in the early 1900s that copies of 
Kitab al-Manazir began to be noted in catalogues of manuscript collections in 
Istanbul and in notices written by German scholars who had practically taken 
up residence in Istanbul libraries. Finally Max Krause published a complete list 
of these manuscript copies at the end of 1936. Six years later Mustafa Nazlf, a 
professor of physics at the Faculty of Engineering in Cairo’s Fuad I Univer- 
sity, published the first substantial study of Ibn al-Haytham’s optical work to 
be based directly on manuscripts of Kitab al-Mand^ir itself. This important 
study in Arabic ( al-Hasan ibn al-Haytham: buhiithuhu wa kashujuhu al-basariyya , 
2 vols, Cairo, 1942-43, 879 pages) remains the best and most comprehensive 
in any language, and it is a model of clear and objective analysis. But although 
Nazif’s study was noted by George Sarton soon after the publication of the 
first volume (Isis, 1943), and later strongly recommended by Matthias 


Preface xiii 

Schramm in his learned monograph, Ibn al-Haythams Weg zurPhysik (1963), it 
has been little used in Western (and, I should add, Eastern) scholarship. 

The present volume, in two parts, is the second of four which, I hope, will 
comprise an edition and English translation of the entire text of Ibn al- 
Haytham’s Optics . The Optics consists of seven Books (or Maqalas) which may 
be divided into two main sections: the first is made up of Books I— III and treats 
the rectilinear radiation of light and colour, and vision produced by rectilinear 
radiation; the second, consisting of the last four Books, is a study of reflection 
and refraction of light and of vision produced by reflected and refracted rays. It 
is planned to devote two volumes to each of these two sections, one volume 
for the Arabic text and another for the English translation. The first volume, 
which has the Arabic text of Books I— III, was published in 1983 by the 
National Council for Culture, Arts and Letters in the State of Kuwait; it forms 
the basis of the translation presented in Part I of the present volume. 

My work on the edition and translation of the Optics has been so long in the 
making that it is now difficult for me to remember exactly when I made the 
decision to embark upon it. The seed from which it eventually started to grow 
must have been planted already in the late 1950s when, as a lecturer in the 
University of Alexandria, I used to visit Mustafa Nazlf in his house in Giza 
whenever I had the opportunity to be in Cairo. Our conversations often 
concerned the history of optics, I having myself done research at the Univer- 
sity of London on seventeenth-century theories of light under the direction of 
Karl Popper. Sometimes these conversations gravitated towards Ibn al- 
Haytham, about whose work I then knew next to nothing (my Ph.D. thesis 
contained one footnote about Ibn al-Haytham, derived from a secondary 
source, which turned out to be wrong). Once Na?if indicated that he was not 
satisfied with what he had read in European languages regarding the so-called 
‘Alhazen’s problem’, and, suspecting the Latin translation of being the source 
of certain misunderstandings, he suggested that we collaborate on a mono- 
graph that would include collation of the relevant passages in Arabic and 
Latin. That project was not destined to be carried out as a collaborative effort, 
but it provided the occasion for my first direct encounter with Arabic optics. 
Na?If did not urge an edition and translation of the whole of Ibn al-Haytham’s 
book (in fact he was inclined to think that such an edition would only be of a 
limited value), but he put me in touch with Ibn al-Haytham’s work, and in his 
house I saw for the first time photographs of manuscripts of Kitab al-Manazir 
and from these I made my first transcription of parts of Ibn al-Haytham’s text. 

I was able to consult the Latin version of the Optics for the first time in 
London in 1961-62 during a leave of absence from the University of Alexan- 
dria, and it soon became clear to me that Nazif’s limited project should be 



xiv Preface 

enlarged to include an edition and translation of the entire seven Books. It 
was, however, only after I joined the University of London’s Warburg 
Institute, first as a Senior Research Fellow in 1962-63 and subsequently as a 
member of its teaching staff, that the idea of this larger enterprise developed 
into a commitment which has claimed my attention for long stretches of time 
ever since. I have the strong feeling that I might not have stayed with that 
decision had it not been for the real interest in the historical role of the Optics 
which I quickly discovered among members of the Institute’s faculty. I have 
not forgotten the amused and kind smile on Otto Kurz’s face when I expressed 
surprise at his interest in the Optics. Nor shall I forget the day when Frances 
Yates walked into my room at the Institute with a copy of her 1936 Study of 
Love's Labour's Lost , in which she had pointed out a connection between the 
book by ‘Hasan ibn Hasan or Alhazen’ and the theme of Shakespeare’s play. 
Ernst Gombrich had made a special study of certain aspects of the Optics (he 
had written in Art and Illusion that ‘Alhazen . . . taught the medieval West the 
distinction between sense, knowledge, and inference, all of which come into 
play in perception’), and his constant questioning, and expert answers to 
questions, were a source of stimulation and a valuable guide. It will not be too 
much to say that had it not been for his interest and encouragement, which 
continued undiminished after I left the Warburg in 1972, my research plans 
and my career would probably have taken a different direction. 

I am particularly indebted to a number of institutions and individuals who 
have helped me in various ways. A grant from the University of Alexandria 
and a later grant from the American Council of Learned Societies made it 
possible for me to purchase photocopies of manuscript material. I wish to 
thank all the libraries which supplied copies of or granted access to the 
manuscripts quoted or referred to in this volume, in particular the Siiley- 
maniye Library and the Topkapi Library in Istanbul which between them 
house all known copies of Kitab al-Manazir. At an early stage of my work, 
Matthias Schramm offered me, unsolicited, the use of a large number of 
microfilms, some of which were of manuscripts until then unrecorded in 
published catalogues and several of which have proved to be extremely 
valuable to my research; I shall always be indebted to him for his extreme 
generosity. Over the past several years I have discussed aspects of this work in 
conversations with I. Bernard Cohen, Muhsin Mahdi and John E. Murdoch; 
their interest and support have been invaluable. 

To establish the concordance between the Arabic text and the Latin 
translation I needed the assistance of someone who would read to me out loud 
one version while I kept my eyes on another; I wish to acknowledge the help 
of Shoukri Abed, Therese-Anne Druart and Tzvi Langermann who, at 


Preface xv 

different times, shared with me many hours of patient labour. While arrang- 
ing the cards I had prepared for the Arabic-Latin glossaries, Gregg De Young 
pointed out omissions some of which I have been able to remedy. I am grateful 
to Wolfhart Heinrichs whose critical eye saved the glossaries from a number 
of errors. I owe a special debt to J. B. Trapp for his patient and meticulous 
reading of the entire typescript. Not only did he suggest many improvements; 
his probing queries have helped to uncover some mistranslations and even 
some omissions. I must add that final decisions with regard to all aspects of 
this book have been mine, and I am alone responsible for all its defects and 
shortcomings. Last but far from least, my thanks are due to Harriet Boardman 
who, with seemingly inexhaustible patience, carefully typed and retyped 
numerous versions of every page of the translation, a task which she was 
always ready to undertake with genuine enthusiasm. Thanks are due also to 
C. S. F. Burnett and Elizabeth Witchell for help with the proofs. 

I have received generous support from the United States National Science 
Foundation (History and Philosophy of Science Program) and the National 
Endowment for the Humanities (Translation Program) which allowed me to 
devote some of my time to this research, and also enabled me to make two 
visits to libraries in Europe and Istanbul and to acquire microfilms. For this 
support I am very grateful. 

I cannot sufficiently express my gratitude to the Sabah al-Salem al-Mubarak 
al-Sabah Foundation for its generous grant towards the expenses of 
publication. 

Finally I should like to acknowledge my debt to two of my teachers who 
have profoundly influenced my intellectual development. From the late 
Abul-'Ela ' Afifi, my teacher as an undergraduate in the University of Alexan- 
dria, I first learnt the objective approach to the study of Islamic intellectual 
history; and he was the first to teach me the real meaning of scholarship as well 
as how to read a medieval manuscript. Karl Popper kindled my interest in the 
philosophical significance of scientific thought; he inspired and guided my first 
efforts in the history of optics, and he was the first to encourage me to study 
the history of Arabic science. This volume is gratefully dedicated to both of 
them. 

A. I. SABRA 

Harvard University 


XX 


Introduction 


I. Sources for life & works 


XXI 


Azhar mosque in Cairo’ where he led the life of an ascetic, writing and 
copying mathematical texts and teaching. 3 

The story is not implausible, at least in its broad outline, but Ibn al-Qifti 
does not reveal its source. He adds a report on I. H. which he obtained from 
his long-time friend ‘Yusuf al-Fasi al-Isra’ili’. 4 This is the philosopher- 
physician Joseph ben Judah who began his life and education in the Maghrib 
(North Africa), where he was born probably towards the end of the reign of 
the Almohad ruler e Abd al-Mu’min (r. 1130-63). About 1185 he left the 
Maghrib for Egypt where he stayed in Cairo for a short time, during which he 
was in touch with Maimonides (another emigrant from Almohad Spain), 
with whom he worked on a revision of the astronomy of Jabir ibn Aflah, a 
copy of which he had brought with him. He then moved to Syria and settled in 
Aleppo where he became an intimate friend of Ibn al-Qiftl’s. He died there in 
1226 after a successful career as a physician and merchant. Yusuf told Ibn 
al-Qifti that he had ‘heard’ (sami'tu) that I. H. earned his living from the annual 

3 About I. H. ’s teaching activity we know practically nothing. We are, however, told (by Ibn 
Abl Usaybf a, Tabaqat , 11, pp. 98-99) that the learned Egyptian amir , al-Mubashshir ibn Fadk, 
author of Mukhtdr al-hikam wa mahdsin al-kilam , was one scholar who studied astronomy and 
mathematics with him. Another student of his in Egypt, this time in algebra, was a physician- 
philosopher named Ishaq ibn Yunus (ibid., p. 99); see below. I. H.’s activity as copyist of 
mathematical works is represented by a surviving copy in his handwriting of an Arabic version 
of Apollonius’ Conics : MS Ayasofya 2762. For a photographic reproduction of a page from this 
manuscript showing I. H.’s signature, see Matthias Schramm, Ibn al-Haytham$ Weg zurPhysik, 
Wiesbaden, 1963, facsimile facing p. x. 

4 In Lippert’s edition of Ibn al-Qifti’s Ta’rikh (p. 167, line 8) the name of Yusuf al-Isra’ill 
appears as ‘al-Nashf, rather than ‘al-Fasi’ — the reading found in Ibn Abi Usaybf a’s quotation 
of this passage (Muller’s edition of the Tabaqat [below, n. 7], 11, p. 91, line 17). There can be no 
doubt, however, that the reference is to Yusuf ibn Yahya [i.e. Joseph ben Judah] ibn Ishaq 
al-Sabti (i.e. of Sabta or Ceuta, in North Africa) al-Maghribi, Abu al-Hajjaj, the ‘physician 
from Fas’ to whom Ibn al-Qifti devotes a long and amusing biographical notice (Ta’rikh, 
pp. 392-94). See Ibn Abl Usaybf a’s Tabaqat, ed. cit., II, p. 213, and the full article by S. Munk, 
‘Notice sur Joseph ben lehouda ou Aboufhadjadj Yousouf ben-Ya’hya al-Sabti al-Maghrebi, 
disciple de Maimonide’, in Journal Asiatique, 3rd series, 14 (1842), pp. 5-70. The identification 
of Joseph ben Judah with Joseph ibn 'Aqnin, doubted by Munk (pp. 8-10), was defended by 
M. Steinschneider (‘Joseph ibn Aknin’, in Allgemeine Encyklopddie der Wissenschaften und Kiinste, 
ed. J. S. Ersch andj. O. Gruber, Sekt. II, Band 31, Leipzig, 1855, pp. 45-58), and accepted by 
George Sarton ( Introduction to the History of Science, II, Baltimore, 1931, pp. 380-81). It was 
again called into question by D. H. Baneth in his edition of Mose Ben Maimon Epistulae , fasc. I, 
Jerusalem, 1946, pp. 1-2, and finally disproved by him in ‘Joseph Ibn Shim'on, Maimonides’ 
prominent disciple, and Joseph Ibn 'Aqnln’, Otzar Yehude Sefarad , 7 (1964), pp. 1 1-20; see S. D. 
Goitein in Studia Orientalia Memoriae D. H. Baneth Dedicata , Jerusalem, 1979, p. 3. Yusuf is also 
the source of the story about a public burning of books in Baghdad, in which one of the 
casualties was a writing by I. H. He told Ibn al-Qifti that while in Baghdad [in 1192] on a 
business trip from Aleppo he witnessed a gathering for the burning of philosophical books from 
the library of *Abd al-Salam al-Rukn which included a work by I. H. on astronomy (Ta’rikh, 
p. 229; Munk, pp. 18-20). The title given is Kitab al-Hay’a li-Ibn al-Haytham , possibly the same 
as Maqdla ft Hay 'at al- r dlam (‘Treatise on the Configuration of the World’ — see below). 


income of one hundred and fifty Egyptian dinars, the ‘non-negotiable price’ 
which he demanded for preparing a copy of the Elements of Euclid, the 
so-called Intermediate Books 5 and Ptolemy’s Almagest each year. The same 
report concludes with the statement that I. H. ‘died at Cairo in (Jt hudud) the 
[Hijri] year four hundred and thirty [a.d. 1038-39] or shortly thereafter (aw 
ba'daha bi-qalxl) — God knows best’, to which Ibn al-Qifti adds the following 
words: ‘and I have seen in his [I. H.’s] handwriting a volume on geometry 
which he wrote in the year four hundred and thirty-two [a.d. 1040-41] and it 
is in my possession — thanks be to God’. 6 Clearly, this last sentence was 
meant to add more precision to the date transmitted by Yusuf al-Fasi; and we 
are, therefore, led to conclude that I. H. died in (or soon after) a.h. 432/ 
a.d. 1040-41. 

Ibn Abl U$aybfa, in his Tabaqat , reproduces (with acknowledgement) the 
whole story from Ibn al-Qiffi together with the report attributed to Yusuf 
al-Fasi, but without Ibn al-Qiftfs statement about I. H.’s autograph of 
a.h. 432. 7 He adds another report which he heard directly from ‘al-Shaykh 
"Alarn al-DTn ibn Abi al-Qasim ibn "Abd al-Ghanl ibn Musafir, al-Hanafi, 
al-Muhandis’. This scholar, also known as Qaysar and as Ta'asif, was born at 
Usfun (or Usfun) in Upper Egypt in a.h. 574/A. d. 1178-79. An expert on 
Qur’anic readings ( qiraat ), he studied mathematics in Egypt and Syria, then 
went to study musical theory with the famous Kamal al-Dln ibn Yunus 
(d. a.d. 1242) at al-Maw$il, after which he went back to Syria where he lived 
for some time in the service of the Ayyubid ruler TaqI al-DIn Mahmud at 
Hamat. He was one of the scholars who were asked to answer the ‘Sicilian 
Questions’ addressed by Frederick II to the Ayyubid sultan al-Malik al-Kamil, 
and he corresponded with the Persian mathematician Na$Ir al-DIn al-Tusi on 


5 The ‘Intermediate Books’, or al-Mutawassitat , were a collection of mathematical and 
astronomical writings (the so-called ‘minor astronomy’ of the Greeks) which the student of 
astronomy was expected to study after mastering Euclid’s Elements and before embarking on a 
study of Ptolemy’s Almagest . They included Autolycus’ Moving Sphere , Euclid’s Data, Optics 
and Phenomena , Theodosius’ Spherics and the Spherics of Menelaus. An idea of the contents of 
these books in the Arabic tradition can be had from the extensively used recensions (tahrirdt) 
which Nasir al-Dtn al-Tusi made of them in the thirteenth century. See al-Tusi, MajmiY 
al-Rasa’il, 2 vols, Hyderabad, Dn., a.h. 1358-59. 

6 Abu al-Faraj ibn al-'Ibri (d. 1286), in Ta’rikh mukhtasar al-duwal (ed. Antun Jalhani, S.J., 
Beirut, 1958, p. 183), states that I. H. died in Cairo after a.h. 430. He appears to have relied 
solely on the accounts reported by Ibn al-Qifti. 

7 Ibn Abi Usaybf a, f Uyuti al-anba’ fi Tabaqat al-atibba ed. August Muller, 2 vols, Cairo- 
Konigsberg, 1882-84, pp. 90-98. 



xxii Introduction 

problems of geometry. He died in Damascus in a.h. 649/A. d. 1251. 8 Accord- 
ing to 'Alam al-DIn, 9 1 . H. first lived in Basra and its environs where he served 
as a vizier ( kana awwala amrihi bi-al-Ba$ra wa nawahiha qad wuzira). He was 
attracted to philosophy and desired to devote himself to its study unhindered 
by other occupations. To achieve his purpose he pretended to be mentally 
deranged until he was relieved of his duties. Then he went to Egypt where he 
took up residence ( aqama ) at the Azhar mosque. He used to make one copy 
each of Euclid and the Almagest for sale every year and live on the proceeds, 
and continued to do so until he died. In this brief report there is no mention of 
al-Hakim or of the Nile project. 

The particular importance of the Tabaqat of Ibn Abl Usaybi'a lies in the fact 
that it has preserved three documents of special value for the study of I. H.’s 
life and works: (1) an intellectual autobiography which I. H. completed at the 
end of the year A.H. 417 (i.e. 10 February 1027) and to which is appended a list 
of I. H.’s writings up to that date; (2) a second list of I. H.’s compositions 
during the eighteen-lunar-month period from the end of Dhu al-Hijja 417 to 
the end ofjumada II, 419 (i.e. from 1 1 February 1027 to 25 July 1028); and (3) a 
third list covering his compositions up to the end of a.h. 429 (i.e. 2 October 
1038), that is two or three years before I. H. died. 10 

It should be first remarked that we have no reason to doubt the date of the 
first list. The date is mentioned twice by Ibn Abi Usaybfa and it occurs once 

8 H. Suter, Die Mathematiker und Astronomen der Araber und ihre Werke , Abhandlungen zur 
Geschichte der mathematischen Wissenschaften, 10, Leipzig, 1900, no. 358, p.143; idem, 
“Nachtrage und Berichtigungen zu “Die Mathematiker...”’, ibid., 14 (1902), p.175; 
C. Brockelmann, Geschichte der arabischen Litteratur [GAL], I 2 , p.625; Suppl. 1, p. 867. The 
following may be added to the Arabic sources cited by Suter and Brockelmann: Ja'far ibn 
Tha'lab (d. c. a.h. 748/A.D. 1347-48), al-TdlT al-sa'Id at-jami' li-asmd ’ al-judald * wa al-ruwah 
bi-ala al-Sa'id , Cairo, 1914, no. 367, pp. 259-60; re-edited (as al-Tali' al-sa'id al-jami' asmd’ 
mijaba al-Sa'td) by Sa'd Muhammad Hasan, Cairo, 1966; see pp. 469-71, where the date of 
’Alam al-Dm’s birth is given as a.h. 564/A. d. 1168-69. Further information particularly 
regarding 'Alam al-Din’s correspondence with al-Tusi is in A. I. Sabra, ‘Simplicius’s Proof of 
Euclid’s Parallels-Postulate’, in Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes , 32 (1969), 
pp. 1-24, esp. pp. 8 ff. 

9 Ibn Abl Usaybi'a, Tabaqat, n, p. 90, lines 20-26. 

10 The autobiography and the three lists together occupy pp. 91-98 in Muller’s edition of Ibn 

Abi UsaybiVs Tabaqat. The lists are conveniently presented, with references to editions, 

European translations and studies, in G. Nebbia, ‘Ibn al-Haytham nel millesimo anniversario 
della nascita’, inPhysis , 9(1967), pp. 165-214. For additions and corrections see A. I. Sabra, ‘Ibn 
al-Haytham’, in Dictionary of Scientific Biography , ed. C. C. Gillispie, vol. vi, New York, 1972. 
pp. 189-210. A partial French translation of the lists was published by F. Woepcke in his 
Valgebre d’Omar Alkhayyami , Paris, 1851, pp. 73-76; but see corrections by H. Suter in 
Mathematiker , pp. 92-93 . There is a German translation of I. H. ’s autobiography and of the three 
lists in E. Wiedemann’s ‘Ibn al-Haitam, ein arabischer Gelehrter’, in Festschrift [Jur]J. Rosenthal , 
Leipzig, 1906, Pti, pp. 147-78. The autobiography is discussed in G. Misch, Geschichte der 
Autobiographie , in, Pt2, Frankfurt-am-Main, 1962, pp. 984—91. 


I. Sources for life & works xxiii 

more in I. H. ’s own account. At the first mention of this date Ibn Abl U$aybfa 
adds the information that the last day in the year a.h. 417 Tell within the 
months of the sixty-third lunar year of [I. H.’s] age’. If true, this statement 
would allow the deduction that I. H. was born in a.h. 354/A.D. 965, the date 
which, in fact, has been generally adopted by his biographers. It would also 
follow that I. H. would have passed the age of seventy-seven at the end of 
a.h. 43 2/A. d. 1040-41, the year in which, or soon after which, he died. We 
should note, however, that this additional piece of information is neither 
mentioned in I. H.’s autobiography itself, nor does Ibn Abl U$aybi'a tell us 
where he obtained it. 

Ibn Abi Usaybi'a tells us that he transcribed the autobiography and the first 
two lists from the author’s autographs, and he states at the end of the second 
list that that was all he had found by I. H.’s hand. In contrast, he refers to the 
third list simply as ‘a catalogue (fihrist) which I have also found of Ibn 
al-Haytham’s writings up to the end of the year four hundred and twenty- 
nine’ (i.e. up to 2 October 1038). 

The autobiography is clearly modelled after Galen's De libris propriis , 11 but 
interesting though it is for the light it sheds on I. H.’s intellectual develop- 
ment 12 it cannot but disappoint the historian who is looking for concrete 

11 Galen’s De libris propriis had been translated into Arabic (with the title Finaks [Mvaq] or 
Fihrist kutubihi) by Hunayn ibn Ishaq for Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn Musa in the ninth century. 
See G. Bergstrasser (ed. and trans.), Hunain ibn Ishaq iiber die syrischen und arabischen Galen - 
Ubersetzungen , Abhandlungen fur die Kunde des Morgenlandes, 17, no. 2, Leipzig, 1925, 
pp. 2-4 (Arabic), 2-3 (German); and F. Sezgin, Geschichte des arabischen Schrifttums, [GAS] in, 
pp. 78-79. I. H. refers to Galen four times in his autobiography: twice to De methodo medendi , 
once to Depulsibus ( Kitdb al-Nabd al-kabir) and once to an unnamed work. In all these references 
he sees himself either as following Galen’s example in his way of life and work or as having 
suffered the same misfortune as his obviously revered predecessor (both lost some of their 
writings through careless hands). On the literary relationship between I. H.’s autobiography 
and Galen’s De libris propriis , see F. Rosenthal, ‘Die arabische Autobiographie’, in Studia Arabica 
I = Analecta Orientalia , 14, Rome, 1937, pp. 3-40, esp. pp. 7-8. 

12 I. H. speaks (Ibn Abi Usaybi'a, Tabaqat , 11, p. 91, line 24 — p. 93, line 7) of an early period in 
which the variety of sectarian doctrines had led him to put them all in doubt; once his mental 
powers matured he set about searching for the ‘one truth’ which the differing sects had fallen 
short of reaching and which alone could bring him closer to God; a probing examination of 
current beliefs, which included a study of the various religious sciences ( anwa 'ulum al-diydnat ), 
led him nowhere; finally he emerged with the conviction that the only way to the truth was 
through ‘doctrines the matter of which is sensible and the form of which is rational’; these 
doctrines he found exemplified only in the writings of Aristotle on logic, physics and 
metaphysics ‘which constitute the substance of philosophy’; from then on, the study of ‘the 
philosophical sciences’, namely mathematics, physics and metaphysics, became the ruling 
principle of his life. Now it is clear from the titles of many of 1 . H.’s works that he devoted a 
great deal of effort to the study of Aristotle’s writings, of which he gives a detailed conspectus in 
the autobiography. As a mathematician, however, and as a writer on optics, he could not have 
found models for his own investigations in the writings of Aristotle — with the exception of 
Aristotle’s Meteorology which, uncharacteristically, offered a mathematician’s explanation of 
the shape and size of the rainbow couched in the mathematical language of visual rays. 


xxiv Introduction 

details of the author’s life. In contrast, for example, to Avicenna’s auto- 
biography, which comes from the same period, I. H.’s account yields no 
information about his family, the scholars with whom he studied or the places 
in which he lived. Not even the date and place of his birth are mentioned. 

The first list consists of two parts which we shall refer to as List la and List 
lb. The first of these contains twenty-five titles of works on mathematical 
subjects, and the second has forty-four titles on questions of physics and 
metaphysics ( ilahiyyat ). Excluded from both parts of this first list, as I. H. tells 
us, were several works which ‘have fallen into the hands of certain people in 
Basra and Ahwaz, the prototypes of which (dasatir) have been lost, and which I 
have been prevented from copying by preoccupation with worldly affairs and 
the distractions of travel’. 

The second list (List II) contains twenty-one titles on a variety of subjects 
including kalam (Islamic dialectical theology) and prophecy as well as natural 
philosophy, medicine, optics and astronomy. One of these titles (no. II 13) is: 
‘A reply by [I. H.] to a geometrical question which he was asked at Baghdad 
(su’ila 'anha bi-Baghdad) in the months of the year a.h. 418 [a.d. 1027-28]’. 
This would seem to imply that I. H. was in Baghdad some time during that 
year, that is six years after the death of the caliph al-Hakim. 13 

The third list (List III) is long, containing the titles of no fewer than 
ninety-two works on mathematical, optical and astronomical subjects. These 
include some of the largest and most important works of 1 . H. , one of which is 
Kitdb al-Mana^ir (no. Ill 3), probably the largest and certainly the most 
ambitious of I. H.’s compositions. Three things are also noticeable about this 
list. First, it contains all sixty-nine titles attributed to I. H. by Ibn al-Qiftl in a 
list following his account of I. H.’s biography (hereafter referred to as List Q) 
— but with some exceptions. At least two works in Q are not mentioned in 
List III. These are: Q 2: Tahdhtb al-Majistx (‘Revision of the Almagest ’), and 
Q 69: al-Burhdn 'ala md yarahu al-falakiyyun Jtahkdm al-nujum (‘Demonstration 
of the Opinion of Astronomers regarding Astrology’). The first of these may 
be identical with la 3: Sharh al-Majisti wa talkhisuhu sharhan wa talkhi$an 
burhaniyyan (‘A Commentary and Summary of the Almagest supported by 
Demonstrations’); and the second may be the same as lb 31: Kitdb ft Tathbxt 

13 I. H. must have also been in Baghdad some time before 10 February 1027, the terminus ad 
quem of List I. The title no. Ia 19 in this list reads: Ajwibat sab' masa’il ta'ltmiyya siTiltu 'anha 
bi- Baghdad fa-ajabtu (‘Replies to seven mathematical Questions addressed to me in Baghdad’). 
We also know that I. H. corresponded with the Baghdadian Nestorian philosopher Abu 
al-Faraj ibn al-Tayyib (d. 1043) some time between 11 February 1027 and 25 July 1028, the 
period covered by List II. as is indicated by the title no. 3 in this list: Risala ild Abx al-Faraj 
' Abdillah ibn al-Tayyib al-Baghdadi al-mantiqi ft 'iddat ma'dnin min al-'ulum al-tabTiyya wa 
al-ild hiyya (‘Epistle to Abu al-Faraj 'Abdallah ibn al-Tayyib, the Logician of Baghdad, on a 
Number of Points relating to physical and metaphysical Sciences’). 


I. Sources for life & works xxv 

ahkam al-nujum (‘A Book on the Confirmation of the Judgements of Astro- 
logy’). (Q 18: Mas’ala ftal-misdha [‘A Question on Surveying’] may, however, 
be the same as III 58: Qawl ft Jawab mas’ala ft al-misaha [‘Discourse in Reply to a 
Question on Surveying’].) 

Second, it is remarkable that most of I. H.’s extant works (which are now 
known to number more than sixty), are to be found in List III rather than in 
the other two lists. I say ‘most’, and not ‘all’, because a number of manuscripts 
which bear his name and which have recently come to light are certainly not 
included in List III, and indeed some of them are not mentioned in any of the 
three lists. Examples of the second category are Maqala jt Tamdm Kitdb 
al-Makhrutat (‘A Treatise on the Completion of the Book of Conics 1 ), and 
Maqala jt Hay ’at harakat kull wahid min al-kawakib al-saKa (‘A Treatise on the 
Arrangement of the Motions of each one of the Seven Planets’). 14 

Third, the order of works in List III agrees as a rule with their chronological 
order of composition, when the latter can be determined from cross- 
references within the works themselves. Thus it can be verified, in the table 
that follows, that works listed in the left-hand column were written before 
those directly opposite them in the right-hand column: 

III 2: M(aqdla)f (I) Shark Musadarat III 53: M.f al-Tahlll wa al-tarklb 

K(itdb) Uqlidis ji al-Usul (‘Tr[eatise] on Analysis and Synthesis’) 

(‘Commentary on the Premisses of 
Euclid’s Book of Elements 1 ) 15 

14 The treatise on Tamdm Kitdb al-Makhrutat , a reconstruction of the lost eighth Book of 
Apollonius’ Conics , survives in a unique thirteenth-century manuscript at Manisa (Genel 1706) 
in Turkey. It has been published in facsimile as Das achte Buch zu den * Conica ’ des Apollonios von 
Perge, rekonstruiert von Ibn al-Haysam, ed. and introd. by Nazim Terzioglu, Istanbul, 1974. A 
study of this work is J. P. Hogendijk, Ibn al-Haytham's Completion of the Conics , New 
York/Berlin/Heidelberg/Tokyo, 1985, which includes a critical edition and English translation 
of I. H.’s text. 

The Maqala ft Hay’at harakat kull wahid min al-kawakib al-sab'a has recently been noted in a 
manuscript in the Soviet Union; see B. Rozenfeld’s articles cited in n. 25 below. 

15 III 2 refers to an earlier work with the title Kitdb ft Hall shukuk Kitdb Uqlidis wa sharh ma'anlh 
(‘A Book on the Solution of Difficulties and Explanation of Notions in Euclid’s Book [of 
Elements]’). The title does not occur in this form in Ibn Abl Usaybi'a or in Ibn al-Qiftl, but 
several manuscripts of the book itself are extant. It is likely that the ‘book’ is a compilation of 
treatises (maqalas) written at different times and each devoted to one or more of the thirteen 
books of Euclid’s Elements. Title no. la 24, for example, reads: Maqala ft Hall shakk ' aid Uqlidis 
ft al-maqdla al-Khamisa min Kitdb [ Uqlidis] ft al-usul al-riyadiyya (‘Treatise on the Solution of a 
Difficulty in Book V of Euclid’s Work on mathematical Principles’). Compare also the titles of 
works nos III 39: Maqala ft Hall shakk ft mujassamdt Kitdb Uqlidis (‘Treatise on the Solution of a 
Difficulty concerning solid Figures in Euclid’s Book’); III 55: Qawl ft Hall shakk ft al-maqdla 
al-thdniya ' ashra min Kitdb Uqlidis (‘Discourse on the Solution of a Difficulty in Book XII of 
Euclid’s Work’); and III 56: Maqala ft Hall shukuk al-maqdla al-uld min Kitdb Uqlidis (‘Treatise on 
the Solution of Difficulties in Book I of Euclid’s Work’). Compare similar titles in Ibn al-Qiftf s 
list, nos 4, 21 and 22 (Ta’rlkh, pp. 167-68). A unique copy of (?part of) III 55 occupies pages 278 
bis b-279b in the Kuibyshev manuscript described by B. Rozenfeld; see n. 25 below. For manu- 
scripts of the comprehensive Hall shukuk Kitdb Uqlidis , see F. Sezgin, GAS, v, p. 370, no. 27. 



xxvi 


Introduction 


I. Sources for life & works 


xxvii 


III 3: K.f al-Mana^ir (‘Book of 
Optics’) 


III 6: M.f Daw' al-qamar (‘Tr. on the 
Light of the Moon’) 17 


III 36: M.f. Kayfiyyat al-azlal (‘Tr. 
on the Quality of Shadows’) 

III 38: M.f Hall shukuk fi al-maqala 
al-ula min K. al-Majistl yushakkiku fiha 
ba'du ahl al-'ilm (‘Tr. on the Solution of 
Difficulties in the First Book of the 
Almagest , which a certain Scholar has 
raised’) 16 

III 49: M.f Maiyyat al-athar alladhi jt 
wajh al-qamar (‘Tr. on the Nature of the 
Mark [seen] on the Face of the Moon’) 
III 60: M. (or Qawl) f al-Daw 3 
(‘Discourse on Light’) 

III 64: M.f al-Shukuk e ala Batlamyus 
( Dubitationes in Ptolemaeum) 

III 77: M.f. al-Kura al-muhriqa (‘Tr. 
on the burning Sphere’), and 

III 80: M.f Surat al-Kusuf Tr. on 
the Form of the Eclipse’) 

III 49: M.f Ma'iyy at al-athar alladhi fi 
wajh al-qamar (‘Tr. on the Nature of the 
Mark [seen] on the Face of the Moon’) 


16 The title of III 3 8 is here cited as it appears in Ibn Abl Usaybi'a. I have consulted a copy in MS 
Fatih 3439, fols I42b-50b, whose title omits ‘ al-Maqala al-ula' (the First Book). The corres- 
ponding title (no. 55) in Ibn al-Qifti simply reads: Hall shukuk al-Majisti (‘Solution of Diffi- 
culties in the Almagest') . It should, therefore, be noted that the ‘difficulties’ ( shukuk ) discussed in 
the Fatih MS are not restricted to Bk I of the Almagest. This copy in fact consists of three 
distinguishable parts. First (Parti) there are five shukuk relating to Bk I (i42b-i45a). This is 
followed without a break (Part II) by what are described as ‘answers to doubtful questions in the 
Almagest ’ (i4$a-i48b). There are nine such questions concerned with various parts of Ptolemy’s 
book. The ninth ends with the words ‘this is the last of your questions’, without naming the 
questioner. Then (Part III) there follow, again without a break, four new shukuk (i48b-i5ob), 
also not confined to Bk I of the Almagest. The last (fol. 1 50b) is an answer to a doubt or difficulty 
(shakk) concerning parallax which is described as ‘one of the doubts raised by Abu al-Qasim ibn 
Ma'dan’. Ibn Ma'dan, who is otherwise unknown to me, may well be the author of all or some 
of the doubts dealt with in the previous pages, but this cannot be certain. I. H. refers to his own 
Kitab al-Mandzir once in Part I (fol. 143a) and again in Part III (fol. 148b). For a discussion of 
some of the contents of the Fatih MS, see A. I. Sabra, ‘Psychology versus Mathematics’, 
pp. 231-36. I have not seen the copies of the Hall in MSS Veliyuddin 2304 and Aligarh, 
'Abdalhaiy 21 (cf. Sezgin, GAS , vi, p. 258, no. 13). 

17 Composed before 15 Sha'ban 422/7 August 1031, the day on which the Egyptian physician 
'All ibn Ridwan (d. 1068) finished making a copy of it (Ibn al-Qifti, Ta'rikh , p. 444). 


Ill 11: M.f al-Rukhama al-ujuqiyya 
(‘Tr. on the Horizontal Sundial’) 18 

III 20: M. mukhta$ara f. al-ashkal 
al-hildliyya (‘Short Tr. on Lunar 
Figures’) 19 

III 25: M.f. al-Tanbih e ala mawadi ( 
al-ghalat fi kayfiyyat al-rasd (‘Tr. on 
Indicating Errors in the Method of 
[astronomical] Observation’) 

III 26: M.f anna al-kura awsa c 
al-ashkal al-mujassama allati ihatatuhd 
mutasawiya , wa anna al-da'ira awsa c 
al-ashkal al-musattaha allatl ihatatuhd 
mutasawiya (‘Tr. on the Fact that the 
Sphere is the largest of the solid Figures 
with equal Peripheries, and that the 
Circle is the largest of the plane Figures 
with equal Peripheries’) 

III 42: Qawl f Istikhraj muqaddamat 
dil e al-musabba f Tr. on the 
Determination of the Lemma 
concerning the Side of the Heptagon’) 

III 48: M.f. Adwa’ al-kawakib (‘Tr. 
on the Lights of the Stars’) 

III 53: M.f. al-Tahlll wa al-tarklb 
(‘Tr. on Analysis and Synthesis’) 20 


III 66: M.f Khutut al-sa e at (‘Tr. on 
the Lines of the Hours’) 

III 21: M. mustaqsah f al-ashkal 
al-hildliyya (‘Comprehensive Tr. on 
lunar Figures’) 

III 31: M.f Istikhraj khatt nisf al-nahar 
e ala ghdyat al-tahqiq (‘Tr. on the 
Determination of the solar Meridian 
with perfect Precision’) 

III 38: M.f. Hall shukuk fi al-maqala 
al-ula min K. al-Majistt yushakkiku fiha 
ba e du ahl al- ilm (‘Tr. on the Solution of 
Difficulties in the First Book of the 
Almagest , which a certain Scholar has 
raised’), and 

III 68: M.f. al-Makan (‘Tr. on Place’) 


III 74: M.f e Amal al-musabba r fi 
al-da'ira (‘Tr. on inscribing a Heptagon 
ina Circle’) 

III 49: M. f Ma'iyy at al-athar alladhi fi 
wajh al-qamar (‘Tr. on the Nature of the 
Mark [seen] on the Face of the Moon’) 

III 54: M.f. al-Ma r lumat (‘Tr. on the 
known [Things]’) 


18 At the end of III 1 1, 1. H. describes his aim in this treatise as having been to expound only the 
general principles for the construction of sundials, and indicates his intention to begin 
afterwards a more comprehensive ‘book on shadow instruments which will exhaust all notions, 
goals(?) and constructions required by this art (i.e. science of shadows)’ (MS Atif 1714* fob 55 a > 
lines 20-22). I assume that this is a reference to III 66 listed above. 

19 The Kitab fi Hall shukuk Kitab Uqlldis (see n. 1 5 above) mentions ‘our treatise on lunar 
figures’ (Istanbul, MS Universite 800, fol. 101a; see also fols 115a- 117a). There is also a 
reference to kitabuna fi al-hilaliyydt (‘our book on lunes’) in III 30: Maqdla Jt TarbV al-da ira 
(‘Treatise on the Quadrature of the Circle’); see H. Suter, ‘Die Kreisquadratur des Ibn 
el-Haitam’, in Zeitschrifi jur Mathematik und Physik , Hist.-lit. Abt., 44 (1899), pp. and 43. 

20 I. H. ’s words at the beginning of III 53 (Dublin, MS Chester Beatty 3652, fol. 71b, lines 1-3) 
express the author’s intention to write a separate treatise on the subject of III 54 immediately 
after completing III 53. This accords with the consecutive numbers of these two works in 
List III. 


xxviii Introduction 

III 61: M.f Harakat al-iltijaf(*Tr. on 
the Movement of Utifif) 


III 63: M.f. Hall shukuk harakat 
al-iltifif( Tr. on the Solution of 
Difficulties concerning the Movement 
of Iltifif) 

III 66: M. (or K.) f Khutut al-sadt 
(Tr. on the Lines of the Hours’) 21 

There are exceptions to the rule illustrated by these comparisons. Thus 
III 17: M. f Misahat al-mujassam al-mukafi * (‘Tr. on the Measurement of the 
parabolic Solid’), preceded III 16: M.f Misahat al-kura (‘Tr. on the Measure- 
ment of the Sphere’); and III 12: M.f. Rufat al-kawakib (‘Tr. on the Appear- 
ance of the Stars’) may also have preceded III 3: K.f al-Manazir (‘Book of 
Optics’). 23 But these same exceptions, few as they are, would seem to confirm 
the impression that List III has been drawn up with much care. It may well 
have been prepared by I. H. himself, or by someone directly acquainted with 
the works listed. 


Ill 63: M.f Hall shukuk harakat 
al-iltififf Tr. on the Solution of 
Difficulties concerning the Movement 
of Utijaf) 

III 64: M. f al-Shukuk e ald Batlamyus 
(Dubitationes in Ptolemaeum) 


III 77: M.f al-Kura al-muhriqa (Tr. 
on the burning Sphere’) 22 


21 In III 77 (MS Atif 1714, fol. 92a) I. H. states the following proposition: ‘If two unequal arcs ( 

are divided in the same ratio, then the ratio of the sine of the larger part in the smaller arc to the i 

sine of the smaller part in it [i. e. in that arc] is greater than the ratio of the sine of the greater part 

in the larger arc to the sine of the smaller part in it’. He then adds: ‘And we have demonstrated 
this notion in our Book on the Lines of the Rays (fi kitabina f Khutut al-shu'a'at: lines 4-8)’. In 
spite of the mistaken title, there can be no doubt that the reference is to III 66 ( Maqdlafi Khutut 
al-sa'dt), where in fact a proof is given of the above proposition (MS Atif 1714, fols 6ob-65b). 

Ill 66 was available to Kamal al-Dln only in a ‘very corrupt copy’ from which he was not able to 
work out the proof ( Tanqih , 11, pp. 285-86). Cf. also M. Nazlf, al-Hasan, p. 797 and M. Sch- 
ramm, Weg , p. 283, n. 3. 

22 As has been noted, the above table has been compiled exclusively from cross references in 
I. H.’s own works. For editions, translations and studies of the works listed, see the article on 
‘Ibn al-Haytham’ in Dictionary of Scientific Biography , vi (1972), pp. 205-09. Since the appear- 
ance of that article the following have been published: Edition (Kuwait, 1983) and the present 
translation of III 3 (Books I— III); edition (by A. I. Sabra) of III 49 in Journal for the History of 
Arabic Science, 1 (1977), PP- 5-19; edition (by A. I. Sabra) of III 63 in ibid., 3 (1979), pp. 183-217 
(Arabic); edition and French translation (by R. Rashed) of III 74 in ibid., 3 (1979), PP- 228-47 
(Arabic) and 309-57 (French). There is an unpublished edition and English translation (by 
B. H. Sude) of III 2, Princeton University doctoral dissertation, 1974. 

23 A copy of III 12 survives in a manuscript belonging to a private collection in Lahore; see 
A. Heinen, ‘On some hitherto unknown Manuscripts of Works by Ibn al-Haytham’, in 
Proceedings ojthe Second International Symposium on the History of Arabic Science, Aleppo, 1979. See 
nn. 26 and 41 below. 


I. Sources for life & works xxix 

Only the terminus ad quern of List III (that is, 29 Dhu al-Hijja 429 = 

2 October 1038) is explicitly stated by Ibn Abl U$aybi'a. Should we assume 
that this list includes works from I. H.’s entire career, or, rather, that it covers 
only the period beginning with the terminal date of List II (29 Jumada II, 
419 = 25 July 1028)? The first hypothesis might derive some support from the 
apparent similarity (or even identity) between a few titles in List III and titles 
in List I. Thus III 1: M.f Hay’at al-'alam (Treatise on the Configuration of the 
World’) occurs without change as lb 10; and III 10: M.f. Hisab al-mudmalat 
(Treatise on Business Arithmetic’) almost coincides with la 10: K.f Hisab 
al-mu e amalat (‘Book on Business Arithmetic’). Again, III 53: M.f. al-Tahlil wa 
al-tarkib (Treatise on Analysis and Synthesis’) bears a certain similarity with 
la 20: K.f al-Tahlil wa al-tarkib al-handasiyyayn l ala jihat al-tamthil li-l-muta- 
e allimin, wa huwa majmu' masail handasiyya wa e adadiyya hallaltuha wa rak - 
kabtuhd (‘Book on geometrical Analysis and Synthesis by Way of Examples, 
for Students, being a Collection of geometrical and arithmetical Problems 
which I have solved by Analysis and Synthesis’), or with la 8: K. jama'tu jthi 
al-qawl e ala tahlil al-masail al-handasiyya wa al- e adadiyya jami'an (‘A Book in 
which I combined Discussion on the Analysis of both geometrical and 
arithmetical Problems’). But these examples, to which perhaps one or two 
more can be added, are much too few in comparison with the number of 
works contained in the three lists. And it may be noted also that titles of 
presumably different works sometimes resemble one another in one and the 
same list. For these reasons then, it seems, we must discard the first 
hypothesis. 

If, however, we were to adopt the second hypothesis, then I. H. would have 
composed all ninety-two works contained in List III over the span often and a 
half years (from 29 Jumada II, 419 to 29 Dhu al-Hijja 429) that began after he 
was well into his sixty-fourth lunar year of age. This conclusion (based on Ibn 
Abl Usaybi'a’s statement that I. H. was some months into his sixty-third 
lunar year on 29 Dhu al-Hijja 417 = 10 February 1027) may not be impossible, 
but it is rather difficult to accept in the absence of other evidence. One is 
inclined at least to question Ibn Abi UsaybiVs statement, for which, as we 
have noted, he gives no source or justification. This inclination is further 
strengthened by a passage in I. H.’s autobiography of a.h. 417/A.D. 1027. 
There I. H. says, with reference to his efforts in the sciences and the resulting 
works, the titles of which he appended to the autobiography: 

And I will, as long as I live, exert myself and expend my power in the same effort [of 
writing on the philosophical sciences] — with three things in mind: one is to be of 
help in my life and after my death to anyone who seeks the truth in preference to 
other pursuits; the other is that I have used my exercise ( irtiyad) in these matters for 
firming up what my mind has conceived and commanded of these sciences; and the 


xxx Introduction 

third is that I have made it [?the exercise or the written works resulting from it] a 

treasure and a store for the time of old age ( wa al-thalithu antii sayyartuhu dhakhiratan 

wa 'uddatan H-zamdti al-shaykhukha wa awan al-haram ). 24 

Would I. H. have written these last words at the age of sixty-three (as is 
asserted by Ibn Abi U$aybf a)? Would he have been oblivious of the fact that 
he had already reached old age ( zamdn al-shaykhukha) thirteen years earlier, at 
the age of fifty or thereabout? Could it therefore be that Ibn U$aybi'a has 
misquoted or mistranscribed his unnamed source, the correct age of I. H. at 
the time of writing the autobiography being, perhaps, some twenty or thirty 
years younger? The quoted words may, however, be interpreted as referring 
to a past decision, one made earlier in life and not at the time of writing the 
autobiographical account. It would therefore appear that, in default of new 
information, we are obliged to leave our question unanswered. 

Recently there have come to light two manuscript volumes which include 
copies of the documents reproduced by Ibn Abi U$aybi'a. The first collection 
turned up in the Soviet Union (some time before 1973) at the V. I. Lenin 
Kuibyshev Regional Library, 25 and the other has been uncovered in a private 
library at Lahore in Pakistan. 26 Unfortunately they do not shed new light on 
the questions that have concerned us here. List III in the Kuibyshev copy 
comprises eighty-six titles instead of ninety-two, and its terminus ad quern is 
reported to be a.h. 427 instead of 429. It combines III 33: M.f. Khawd$s al-qit 
al-mukdjV (‘Treatise on the Properties of the parabolic Section’) and III 34: 
M.f Khawa$$ al-qit' al-za’id (‘Treatise on the Properties of the hyperbolic 
Section’) into one title. Missing from this copy are titles nos 2, 83, 87 and 91 in 
Ibn Abi U$aybiVs List III. The Lahore copy of Lists I and II was transcribed at 
the Nizamiyya college in Baghdad where it was completed on 1 $afar 
556/A. D. 1161. But List III in this copy is even less complete than in the 
Kuibyshev manuscript, comprising only sixty-two titles, and it does not 
include Kitab al-Manazir . 27 Like the Kuibyshev copy it combines III 33 and 

24 Ibn Abi Usaybi'a, Tabaqdt , 11, p. 93, lines 14-17. 

25 Boris A. Rozenfeld, ‘A medieval physico-mathematical Manuscript newly discovered in 
the Kuibyshev Regional Library’, in Historia Mathematica, 2 (1975), pp. 67-69; idem, ‘The List 
of physico-mathematical Works of Ibn al-Haytham written by himself’, in Historia Mathe- 
matica, 3 (1976), pp- 75-7b. 

26 Anton Heinen, ‘Ibn al-Haitams Autobiographic in einer Handschrift aus dem Jahr 556 
H./1161 A.D.’, in U. Haarmann and P. Bachmann (eds). Die islamische Weltzwischen Mittelalter 
und Neuzeit: Festschrift jiir Robert Roemer zum 6 5. Geburtstag, Beiruter Texte und Studien, 22, 
Beirut, 1979, pp. 254-77. 

27 Work no. 26 in the Lahore copy is a Maqala JT al-Manazir (‘Treatise on Optics’). This is more 
likely to be a reference to no. 27 in Ibn Abi UsaybiVs List III, namely Maqala ft al-Manazir 'ala 
tartqat Batlamyus (‘Treatise on Optics according to the Method of Ptolemy’), than to III 3: Kitab 
al-Manazir, which is a ‘book’ consisting of seven ‘treatises’ or maqalas. 


I. Sources for life sc works xxxi 

III 34 into one. These two volumes, however, include the only copies hitherto 
known of no fewer than five works by I. H. 

An earlier biographical source than Ibn al-Qifti and Ibn Abi Usaybi'a is the 
Tatimmat $iwan al-hikma of £ahlr al-DIn al-Bayhaql (d. 1 169-70). 28 
Al-BayhaqI paints a vivid picture of I. H. ’s meeting with the caliph al-Fiakim 
outside an inn in Cairo: the caliph sat on a donkey fitted with silver trappings 
while the mathematician, being short, stood on a bench to hand him a copy of 
the mechanical treatise he had written on the Nile project. But in this version 
the story is given an abrupt ending. Judging the plan as too costly for its 
supposed benefits, al-Hakim quickly condemned it, ordered the bench to be 
demolished and rode away. Afraid for his life, I. H. immediately fled to Syria 
where he secured the patronage of an amir . If true, this account would imply 
that I. H. never settled in Egypt, a conclusion which must be discounted in 
view of conflicting and more reliable evidence. For example, the title of one of 
I. H.’s works. III 91: Ta'llq 'allaqahu Ishaq ibn Yunus al-mutatabbib bi-misr 'an Ibn 
al-Haytham ft Kitab Dayufantus Jt Masail al-jabr [‘Notes on Diophantus’ Book 
on Questions of Algebra, which the physician Ishaq ibn Yunus took down from 
Ibn al-Haytham in Egypt’]) clearly contradicts al-Bayhaql’s story. And we 
may also note the report in $a'id al-AndalusI (d. 1070) who had been told by a 
judge named 'Abd al-Rahman ibn 'Isa ibn Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Rahman 
that he had met Ibn al-Haytham in Egypt in a. h. 430. 29 An interesting piece of 
information in al-Bayhaql is a quotation from ‘the last’ of I. H.’s works: 

we have imagined certain arrangements (awda — positions) which are suitable 
(mula’ima) for the celestial motions. Had we imagined other arrangements also 
suitable for those motions, there would have been nothing against that. For it has 
not been demonstrated that there can be no other arrangements suitable for these 
motions. 30 

28 Mohammad Shaff (ed.), Tatimma Siwan al-Hikma of 'All b. Zaid al-Baihaki, fasc. 1 (Arabic 
text), Lahore, 1935, pp. 77-80. An analysis and partial English translation of this work has been 
published by M. Meyerhof in Osiris , 8 (1948), pp. 122-216; see esp. pp. 155-56. 

29 Sa'id al-AndalusI, Tabaqdt al-umam, ed. L. Cheikho, S.J., Beirut, 1912, p. 60. 

30 Al-Bayhaql, Tatimma , p. 79. — The bio-bibliographical notice on I. H. in al-Wafx bi-al- 
Wafayat of Salah al-DIn al-Safad! (d. 764/1363; see vol. xi, Wiesbaden, 1981, pp. 420-23) is 
wholly dependent on Ibn Abi Usaybi'a. Al-SafadI notes the discrepancy in I. H.’s name as it 
appears in Ibn Abi Usaybi'a (viz. Muhammad ibn al-Hasan) and as he found it in the ‘table of 
contents o l Kitab al-Manazir (al-Hasan ibn al-Hasan), an ‘old copy’ ol which ‘in seven volumes’ 
he saw in Egypt [al-Wafx, xi, p. 420, lines 5-7; p. 421, line 11; see also al-Safadfs al-Ghayth 
al-musjam ft Sharh Ldmiyyat al-'Ajam , Cairo, a.h. 1350, 1, p. 87). It may be noted that al-Safadi 
misrepresents the transmission of the report going back to Yusuf al-FasI about I. H. ’s practice of 
copying mathematical texts for sale, implying that the report was directly obtained from Yusuf 
by Ibn Abi Usaybi'a; the latter was in fact quoting Ibn al-Qifti (see above). Summing up I. H. ’s 
account of his own intellectual development (above, n. 12) in one sentence, al-Safadi states that 
I. H. ‘shared the beliefs of the ancients (kdna 'ala i'tiqad al-au/a il ), as he made clear’ (p.421, 
line 9). Completely ignoring Lists I and II of I. H.’s works, he reproduces List III with some 
omissions, apparently the result of oversight. 


xxxii Introduction 

These words have not been found yet in any of I. H.’s extant works, but that 
need not put their ascription to him in doubt. 

II 

IBN AL-HAYTHAM’S WRITINGS 
ON LIGHT AND VISION 

The three lists of I. H.’s writings, preserved in Ibn Abl UsaybiYs Tabaqat , 
include no fewer than sixteen works wholly devoted to the subject of light and 
vision, a clear indication of their author’s strong and sustained interest in 
optical matters. Only one optical title occurs in the first list comprising works 
composed before 10 February 1027: 

la 5: Kitab lakhkhastu Jthi '< Urn al-manazir min kitabay Uqlidis wa Batlamyus , wa 
tammamtuhu bi-ma'am al-maqdla al-ula al-mafquda min kitab Batlamyus . 

(la 5: ‘A book in which I have summarized the science of optics from the two 
books of Euclid and Ptolemy, to which I have added the notions of the first 
discourse which is missing from Ptolemy’s book.’) 

Thus we learn, not only that I. H. had access to Ptolemy’s Optics (as well as to 
Euclid’s book of the same title) prior to 1027, but that he had actually made a 
serious study of these two works some time before that date. We shall remain 
ignorant of the character of his reconstruction of the lost Book I of Ptolemy’s 
Optics until this ‘Summary’ is found. 

List II (for the period from 11 February 1027 to 25 July 1028) records two 
works on light and vision: nos 18 and 20. 

II 18: Maqala Jt al-Maraya al-muhriqa, mujrada 'amma dhakartuhu min dhalik ji 
Talkhis Kitabay Uqlidis wa Batlamyus JT al-Mandzir. 

(II 18: ‘Treatise on burning Mirrors, which is separate from what I have stated on 
this subject in the Summary of the Two Books of Euclid and Ptolemy on 
Optics.’) 

The title implies that, in his ‘Summary’ of the two works of Euclid and 
Ptolemy (la 5), I. H. had included a discussion of a subject not originally 
treated in either of these works — a subject, moreover, which we might not 
have expected in a book on manazir . 31 

31 There is, however, at least one precedent in Arabic for combining the subjects of manazir 
and burning mirrors in one treatise, namely the book written in the ninth century by Ahmad 
ibn 'Isa, which may have been known to I. H.; see below, pp. xxxvi-xxxvii, and n. 39. It may 
also be noted that the pseudo-Euclidean Catoptrics , which deals with mirror images in terms of 
rays of sight ( opseis ), concludes with a proposition (no. 30) on the burning effects of a spherical 
concave mirror that collects the rays ( aktines ) of the sun in one point (Ver Eecke, Euclide : 
L'Optique et la Catoptrique , 1959, pp. 122-23). This work (which is not known to have been 
trans lated into Arabic) is generally assumed to be a late compilation (dating perhaps from the 


II. Writings on light & vision xxxiii 

The other work from List II dealt with a strictly optical subject: 

II 20: Maqala Ji Jawhar al-basar wa kayfiyyat wuqu' al-ibsar bilu. 

(II 20: ‘Treatise on the . Nature of [the Organ of] Sight and on how Vision is 
achieved through it’.) 

Neither II 18 nor II 20 is known to have survived. Thus we have none of 
I. H.’s optical works from the period up to 25 July 1028. 

We are much more fortunate with titles in List III, covering the period from 
(probably) 26 July 1028 to 2 October 1038: of the thirteen optical works 
recorded in this list all but one have survived in one or more manuscripts. It 
will be convenient to have before us a complete list of the optical works in 
List III in the order in which they appear in this list: 

III 3: Kitab al-Mandzir (‘Book of Optics’) 

III 6: Maqala Ji Daw 3 al-qamar (‘Treatise on the Light of the Moon’) 

III 8: Maqala Ji Qaws quzah wa al-hala (‘Treatise on the Rainbow and the Halo’) 

III 12: Maqala Ji Ru 3 yat al-kawakib (‘Treatise on the Appearance of the Stars’, or 
‘On seeing the Stars’) 

III 18: Maqala Ji al-Maraya al-muhriqa bi-al-dawa 3 ir (‘Treatise on spherical burning 
Mirrors’) 

III 19: Maqala Ji al-Maraya al-muhriqa bi-al-qutu ' (‘Treatise on parabolic burning 
Mirrors’) 

III 27: Maqala Ji al-Mandzir 'ala tariqat Batlamyus (‘Treatise on Optics according to 

Ptolemy’s Method’) — the only non-extant work in this list. 

Ill 36: Maqala Ji Kayjiyyat al-azldl (‘Treatise on the Quality of Shadows’) 

III 48: Maqala Ji Adwa 3 al-kawakib (‘Treatise on the Lights of the Stars’) 

III 49: Maqala Ji al-Athar alladhi Ji wajh al-qamar (‘Treatise on the Mark [seen] on 
the Face of the Moon’) 

III 60: Maqala (or Qawl) Ji al- Daw 3 (‘Discourse on Light’) 

III 77: Maqala Jial-Kura al-muhriqa (‘Treatise on the burning Sphere’) 

III 80: Maqala Ji $urat al-kusuf( l Treatise on the Form of the Eclipse’) 

To these thirteen titles may be added three astronomical works that 
include discussions of optical matters. One is a ‘Commentary’ on the 
Almagest. The second is III 64: Maqala Ji al-Shukuk 'ala Batlamyus ( Dubitationes 


time of Theon of Alexandria), to which the last proposition may have been added from a 
treatise on burning mirrors (see Ver Eecke, ibid., p. 123, n. 1); it cannot be taken as representing 
a conscious attempt to combine the investigation of specular images and of burning mirrors 
into a single science; see below, section III of this Introduction. 


xxxiv Introduction 

in Ptolemaeum) A 2 And the third is the composite text (III 38) described in 
note 16 above. 

In this section I shall describe all extant writings by I. H. on light and vision, 
with the exception of Kitab al-Manazir (III 3). My aim is not, of course, to 
analyze these writings in detail, but to say enough about them to characterize 
their contents. Apart from conveying a general picture of the extent of I. H.’s 
researches in optics, my description will help in defining the scope and aim of 
Kitab al-Manazir , a task which will be attempted in the next section. The 
following descriptions will also provide a suitable occasion for noting some of 
I. H.’s sources. 

Let us begin with I. H.’s Commentary on the Almagest. This undoubtedly 
early work exists in a unique and incomplete copy preserved at the Topkapi 
Saray in Istanbul, MS Ahmet 1113329(2), 124 fols, dated Jumada II, 655/ 
a.d. 1257. 33 The title is missing but the author’s name appears in the incipit as 
‘Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn al-Havtham’ and later in the text as 
‘Muhammad ibn al-Hasan’. 34 The first, expanded form is identical with 
I. H.’s name as it appears in several places in Ibn Abi U$aybfa. 35 No title in 
List III seems to apply to this text, but an appropriate title (no. 3) occurs in 
List la: 


32 Lists lb and II include titles of summaries or paraphrases of works by Aristotle and Galen 
that dealt in part with matters relating to vision and light: lb 4: Talkhis Kitab al-Nafs li-Aristiitdlis 
(‘Paraphrase of Aristotle’s Book on the Soul’); lb 44: Kitab fi Taqwim al-sfnd'a al-tibbiyya (‘A 
Book on the Perfection of the Art of Medicine’), a collection of thirty epitomes (jumal wa 
jawami') which I. H. made of Galenic writings, including ‘On Demonstration’, ‘On anatomical 
Procedures’, ‘On the Usefulness of the Parts of the Body’ and ‘On Diseases of the Eye’; II 16: 
Talkhis Kitab al-Athar al-'ulwiyya li-Aristiitdlis (‘Paraphrase of Aristotle’s Book on Meteor- 
ology’). None of these paraphrases has survived. On the visual theory in Galen’s non-extant 
Demonstration , see S. Pines ‘Razi critique de Galien’, in Actes du Septieme Congres International 
d’Histoire des Sciences, Jerusalem, August 1953, pp. 480-87. 

The ambiguous title of III 41, Mas'alafi ikhtilaf al-nazar may refer to either of two works in 
Ibn al-Qifti’s list, namelyno. io, Ikhtilaf manzar al-qamar (‘On lunar Parallax’) orno. 56, Ikhtilaf 
al-mattdzir (‘On the Difference of Perspectives’). No extant work of I. H. bears any of these 
titles. 

33 Cf. F. Sezgin, GAS, vi (1978), p. 259, no. 15. See also M. Schramm, ‘Ibn al-Haythams 
Stellung in der Geschichte der Wissenschaften’, in Fikrun wa Fann , no. 6, 1965, pp. 9-10; and 
A. I. Sabra, ‘Ibnal-Haytham’, in Dictionary of Scientific Biography , vi(i972), pp. i99Band2o8B. 
The ‘Commentary’ is the second work in the Ahmet III codex; but since the folios are not 
numbered in the photograph I have used, the following references will consider the text as 
beginning on page lb. 

34 MS Ahmet III 3329, no. 2, pp. ib, and 121b, line 2. 

35 See Tabaqdt , II, esp. p. 97, line 2, where the name ‘Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn 
al-Haytham’ is quoted directly from I. H.’s autograph of List II. 


, II. Writings on light & vision xxxv 

la 3: Shark al-Majisti wa talkhisuhu sharhan wa talkhisan burhaniyyan lam ukhrij minhu 
shay 'an ila al-hisdb ilia al-yasir, wa in akhkhara Allahu fi al-ajal wa amkana 
al-zamanu min al-faragh ista'nafiu al-sharh al-mustaqsf li-dhdlik alladhi ukhrij uhu 
bihi ila al-umur al-'adadiyya wa al-hisabiyya (‘Commentary and Summary of the 
Almagest with Proofs, in which only a few computations have been worked 
out; and if God prolongs my life and I find leisure in my time I shall resume a 
more comprehensive commentary that will take me into the numerical and 
computational matters’). 

The Commentary originally covered (or was intended to cover) the topics 
dealt with in all thirteen Books of the Almagest , but the manuscript we have 
was transcribed from a copy which lacked the last eight sections (jusul) and the 
end of section five. The passage that is of interest to us here occurs in the first 
section and concerns the following explanation in the Almagest (Bk. 1, ch. 3) of 
why the stars (in particular the sun and moon) and distances between them 
^ appear larger near the horizon than at higher positions: 

. . . the apparent increase ... in sizes [of the stars] at the horizons is caused, not by a 
r decrease in their distances, but by the exhalations of moisture surrounding the earth 

being interposed between the place from which we observe and the heavenly 
bodies, just as objects placed in water appear bigger than they are, and the lower 
they sink, the bigger they appear. 36 

Like other commentators before and after him, I.H., in his Commentary , 
interprets Ptolemy’s brief remarks as drawing a strict analogy between the 
effect of atmospheric vapour on the star’s appearance and the effect of 
] refraction (the word is not used in this context by either Ptolemy or I. H.) on 

I the appearance of objects immersed in water. Thus he argues that, since in 

horizontal viewing the visual ray traverses a longer distance through the moist 
i atmosphere than in vertical viewing, the horizon star will be ‘deeper’ (aghwas) 

j in the vapour than when it is near the zenith, ‘and therefore it will be seen as 

larger because an object appears larger the deeper it is in water’. 37 Not only 
does I. H. here take the analogy to be valid (in contrast to his own later and 
\ more mature views), but he goes on to provide a totally incorrect proof to the 

| effect that objects placed in water appear larger than they are, and the deeper 

I they sink the larger they appear. The ‘proof’, which is expressed in the 

language of visual rays, begins with this curious statement: ‘It has been shown 


36 Ptolemy's Almagest , translated and annotated by G. J. Toomer, London, 1984, p. 39 - 

37 Cf. al-Shukuk e ald Batlamyus , ed. cit., pp. 74-77. where the relevant passage from I. H.’s 
Commentary on the Almagest is quoted. See esp. p. 75 . lines 12-13. The following corrections 
should be made in the printed text. P. 74, line 12: read tataharrak ; p. 76, line 11: read nihdyatayh ; 
p. 76, line 15: the printed text faithfully reflects the MS, but something must be missing. 


xxxvi Introduction 

in books on optics ( kutub al-mana^ir) that the rays of sight ( al-shu'aat 
al-basariyya) are reflected ( tan'akisu ) from the surfaces of visible things at equal 
angles and in straight lines, such as EL , DT [Figure i], and that these lines 
enter into ( tanjudhu fi) the bodies of the transparent things and reach the object 
immersed in those bodies, so that vision would occur by means of the reflected 
rays (Ja-yaqa'u al-ibsaru bi-al-shu a at al-mun akisaf . 38 



The subsequent argument may be paraphrased as follows: The object DE, 
placed on the water surface AB, is seen by the eye at G through angle DGE. 
When placed below the water surface, as in position D'£\ the object will be 
seen through an angle MGO, such that the extensions of the reflected rays MH 
and OK will reach the extremities D' and E' of the immersed object. Since 
angle MGO is greater than angle DGE, the immersed object will appear larger 
than it is. (Similarly, the object will appear larger still when lowered further to 
position D"£", being now seen through angle M'GO ' which is greater than 
angle MGO.) 

The argument is the same as one found in Ahmad ibn 'Isa’s Kitab al-Manazir 
wa al-mardyd al-muhriqa (‘Book on Optics and on Burning Mirrors’), an early 


38 Al-Shukiik 'ala Batlamyus , p. 76, lines 2-5. The figure shown above has been reproduced, 
with some minor alterations, from MS Ahmet III 3329, p. 6b. The MS does not show the 
position D"£:", and in it D'£' is drawn larger than DE . 


II. Writings on light & vision * xxxvii 

work which may have been written before a.h. 250/A.D. 864-65. 39 But 
although I. H. refers in the Commentary on the Almagest to many Greek and 
Islamic mathematicians and to their writings, including Euclid’s Optics , 40 he 
does not specify the authors or titles of those ‘books on optics’ which he 
mentions in the context of the above discussion. From the character of the 
argument, however, we can be sure that Ptolemy’s Optics was not among 
them. It would therefore seem to be certain that the Commentary was 
composed before la 5, which was itself written before 10 February 1027. 

The treatise On the Appearance of the Stars (no. Ill 12) 41 is entirely devoted to 
the optical problem discussed in the Commentary on the Almagest . Clearly 
composed after the Commentary , and after I. H. had become acquainted with 
Ptolemy’s Optics (to which he refers several times), 42 it shows a better 

39 This work survives in two MSS: Laleli 2752 (2), fols 2ia-i52b, and Ragip Pa§a934, undated 
(? thirteenth century a.d.), 141 fols. (Excerpts in Hebrew characters also exist in MS Vatican 
Hebrew 378, as I have been able to determine from brief quotations shown to me by Dr Tzvi 
Langermann.) The Laleli MS was copied before a.h. 870/ a.d. 1465-66, the year in which it 
came into the possession of ‘Muhammad ibn Abi al-Fath al-Sufi’ (Suter. ‘Mathematiker’, 
no. 447); it is incomplete, lacking some eight pages at the end, which can be read in the Ragip 
Pa§a MS, fols 137b. line 13 to fol. 141b. The Laleli MS includes (fols 153b-! 56b) a Note (ta'liq) 
on refraction dictated by I. H. to ‘al-shanf Abu al-Hasan al-JaTari* and transcribed from a copy 
made by ‘al-shaykh Abu al-Qasim "All ibn Muhammad al-Sumaysati’. The date assumed above 
for Ahmad ibn "Isa is that conjectured by M. Krause (in ‘Stambuler Handschriften’, p. 513), 
presumably a judgement based on Ahmad’s peculiar vocabulary, his shaky grasp of the 
materials presented and their lack of logical organization, in addition to the fact that he makes 
no mention of Arabic authors. Apart from frequent references to ‘the ancients’ ( al-awail ), the 
views he cites are those of the following: Euclid (his Optics and Elements); Anthemius (his book 
‘On the Reflection of the Ray [al-shu'd*] from Burning Mirrors’); Archimedes (the story about 
his successful use of a system of plane mirrors to set fire to the enemy’s ships); Aristotle 
(observations relating to halo, rainbow and rods, without mention of the Meteorology y and 
observations on the effect of wine on vision); the ‘sophists’ (on visual illusions); and, finally, 
Hippocrates and Galen (on the anatomy and diseases of the eye). See below, n. 93. The full title 
of Ahmad’s treatise, as given in the incipit of the Laleli MS and on the title-page of the Ragip 
Pasa MS, is ‘The Book on Optics and on Burning Mirrors, composed by Ahmad ibn ‘Isa 
according to Euclid’s doctrine concerning the causes (or explanation) of vision ('ilal al-basar)\ 

40 The reference to Euclid’s Optics occurs on p. 7a, line 7. 

41 I am grateful to Dr Anton Heinen for a copy of a transcript which he made directly from the 
unique Lahore manuscript of this work. Since the above was written a second copy of I. H’s 
treatise On the Appearance of the Stars has come to light, as I have noted from photocopies kindly 
provided by Mr Husayn Ma'surm HamadanI of Tehran. The text of the treatise is quoted, 
almost in full, by Mulla Fathallah Shirwani (d. 891/1486) in the course of a long optical 
discussion added as a sequel to his commentary ( Sharh ) on al-Tusi’s Tadhkira. The photocopies 
are oi pages (unnumbered) from MS 493 in the Central Library of Tehran University. On 
Shirwani see Brockelmann, GAL y II 2 , p. 209, S II, p. 290; see also A. I. Sabra, ‘Psychology 
versus Mathematics’, esp. pp. 229-31. 

42 In addition to the repeated reference to Book V of Ptolemy’s Optics , I. H. mentions ‘authors 
on optics’ and their ‘books’. But, as in his Commentary on the Almagest , he cites no names or 
titles. 


xxxviii Introduction 

understanding of refraction and a more sophisticated approach to the 
problem. I. H. begins by saying that people have generally assumed that the 
stars were seen by means of a ray that extended to them from the eye in 
straight lines. Those who were versed in optics and mathematics, however, 
believed that 

the stars are seen through a ray 43 that issues rectilinearly until it reaches the ether, 
after which its ends are refracted ( thumma tan'atiju nihaydtuhu) in opposite directions 
away from its middle until they reach the star and encompass it. In consequence of 
this the star appears to be of a smaller magnitude than if it were seen rectilinearly, 
for the two lines issuing from the eye to the extremities of the star’s diameter will 
contain an angle greater than that contained by the rays that have been refracted 
towards it. 

I. H. is aware that the latter view, which he now knows to be based on a 
correct understanding of what happens when rays pass from a denser body 
(such as the earth’s atmosphere) into a rarer one (the ether), is in contradiction 
with the brief account given in the Almagest. But he takes the contradiction to 
be apparent only, and his purpose in writing this treatise is to show ‘the truth 
of what Ptolemy has stated in his Almagest ( f kitabihi ji al-ta'alim ), it being 
possible that the [atmospheric] vapour may be a cause of the apparent 
enlargement of the stars even though they are situated in a purer body {ft jismin 
asja)\ Unfortunately it is difficult to follow I. H.’s arguments precisely in the 
Lahore manuscript. But while there is no hint here of the psychological 
explanation he developed in Book VII of the Optics , he seems to be arguing, 
not that the enlargement is produced in every case by refraction, but that the 
presence of vapour may sometimes cause the enlargement. If this interpre- 
tation is correct, then I. H.’s position in the Treatise on the Appearance of the 
Stars would be compatible with his position in the Optics. For, together with 
the psychological explanation offered in this book as the ‘constant’ cause of the 
phenomenon in question, I. H. also maintains that thick vapour, disposed in a 
certain manner in the earth’s atmosphere, may sometimes act as a contribu- 
tory (or, as he puts it, ‘accidental’) cause. 44 The Treatise on the Appearance of 

43 ‘Ray’ here designates the entire cone of vision, and not any individual line through its apex. 

44 At the end of Book VII of the Optics , and after presenting his own psychological explana- 
tion, I. H. continues as follows: 

The enlargement of heavenly objects at the horizon may frequently have another cause. This 
cause occurs when a thick vapour stands between the eye and the star positioned at or near the 
horizon, if the vapour is at or near the horizon and does not extend to the middle of the sky 
but rather forms the section of a sphere whose centre is the centre of the world because it 
surrounds the earth. If such a section terminates before [reaching] the middle of the sky, then 
the surface of it that faces the eye will be plane. But ifthe surface of the vapour facing the eye is 
plane, then the form[s] of the stars (and intervals between them) will be seen behind the 
vapour as larger than before the vapour occurred. Because the form of the star will [first) 


II. Writings on light & vision xxxix 

the Stars may thus represent a stage in the development of l. H.’s thought prior 
to the composition of the Optics. It would otherwise be difficult to account for 
the fact that this treatise makes no mention of the more radical explanation 
given in the Optics. 

I. H. returns to the same subject in the Dubitationes in Ptolemaeum , but 
having fully dealt with it in the Optics he now contents himself with pointing 
out the contradiction between the passage in the Almagest and the account of 
refraction contained in Book V of Ptolemy’s Optics , without showing an 
desire to explain the contradiction away. 45 

All three sections of which III 38 is composed (see note 16 above) include 
discussions of the problem: why does a celestial magnitude (e.g. the moon) 
appear larger near the horizon than in the middle of the sky? As remarked 
above in note 16, the first and third sections refer to the Optics and, therefore, 
must have been written after that definitive work; and the same may be true of 
section II. In section I it is explained why objects viewed from a rare medium 
like air look larger as they sink deeper in a dense medium like water. The 

45 Al-Shukuk r ala Batlamyus , pp. 5-6. 

occur at the place on the heavens’ concavity from which it will be refracted to the eye. Then, 
in the absence of the thick vapour, the form would extend from this place to the eye in 
straight lines. But, in the presence of the thick vapour at the horizon, this form will extend to 
the surface of the vapour that faces the [middle of) the sky, and thus occur in that surface. 
Sight will therefore perceive this form just as it would perceive objects placed in the vapour: 
that is, the form will extend through the thick vapour on straight lines, then will be refracted 
at the surface of the vapour facing the eye, this refraction being away from the normal to the 
vapour’s surface (which is a plane surface), since the air near the eye is rarer than the thick 
vapour. It follows from this that the form will appear to be larger than it would if it were seen 
rectilinearly. . . . Thus the form that occurs in the surface of the vapour facing the middle of 
the sky is the visible object, and the medium in which the form is is the thick vapour, and the 
eye is in the rarer medium of air. 

The principal cause on account of which the stars (and their mutual intervals) are seen at the 
horizons to be larger than at or near the middle of the sky is the one stated earlier. It is the 
inseparable and constant cause. When, however, a thick vapour happens to rise at the 
horizons, it increases their magnification. But this is an accidental cause which always occurs 
[only] in certain regions of the earth and occasionally in others but is not constant (MS Fatih 
3216, fols 1 3 7b — 1 38b). 

As the ‘accidental’ cause of the apparent magnification, I. H. imagines a situation in which the 
gathering vapour on the horizon terminates in a plane surface at a distance from the observer. 
The rays from the celestial magnitude will reach the observer after two refractions: one 
(towards the normal) through the vapour’s convex surface facing the sky, the other (away from 
the normal) at the plane surface nearer the observer. I. H. considers the situation to be such that, 
as a result of these two refractions, the celestial magnitude will be viewed under a greater angle 
than in the case of a single refraction at the convex surface of a homogeneous, non-vaporous 
atmosphere. I. H.’s argument is developed, with some variations, in his treatise ‘On the 
Appearance of the Stars’ (Ft ru’yat al-kawakib , no. Ill 12); see A. I. Sabra, ‘Psychology versus 
Mathematics’, section II. 


xl 


Introduction 


II. Writings on light & vision 


xli 


explanation does not only rely on the correct understanding of refraction 
displayed in Book VII of the Optics , but brings into play the role (already 
understood by Ptolemy) of distance in judging size. The first ‘Question’ in 
section II attempts to account for the apparent magnification of a star near the 
horizon in terms of refraction — under certain specified conditions: the 
magnification occurs when the ray proceeding first from the observer’s eye in 
rare air strikes the plane surface of a thick vapour gathered on the horizon. 
Finally, in section III, I. H. denies that the vapour responsible for the magnifi- 
cation should encircle the entire earth. He points out the difficulty involved in 
appealing to refraction as the principal cause of the magnification phenom- 
enon; but, rather than dealing with this difficulty he merely refers to his more 
complete treatment of the entire subject in the Optics. 

Several of the optical works in List III fall into distinct categories and they 
will be treated as such in the following accounts. Ill 6 (On the Light of the 
Moon), III 48 (On the Lights of the Stars) and III 49 (On the Mark [ seen / on the Face 
of the Moon) are closely related, being all concerned with heavenly bodies as 
sources of visible light. Ill 6 and III 48 are both mentioned in III 49, and 
therefore both must have been composed before this last work. There are no 
cross-references in III 6 or III 48 that determine their mutual chronological 
order. It may be noted further that the Optics is mentioned in III 49, but not in 
III 6 or III 48. 

In III 6 (On the Light of the Moon ) 46 I. H. accepts the arguments of ‘learned 
investigators’ ( al-muhassilun min ahl al-nazar) in support of the view that the 
moon derives its light from the sun. He notes, however, that ‘the ancients’ 
(al-mutaqaddimiin) never explained the manner in which the moon emits the 
acquired light. He distinguishes two major groups of investigators whose 
opinions on the subject he describes. ‘Mathematicians’ (ashab al-ta'alTm) 
apparently believed (al-maznun min ra’yihim) that the solar rays were reflected 
from the smooth spherical surface of the moon as from a mirror, and that the 
‘luminous colour’ (al-lawn al-nayyir) seen on the side of the moon facing the 
sun is but the solar light shining upon it. As for those who investigated the 

46 The Arabic text of III 6 (On the Light of the Moon ) has been printed as no. 8 in Rasd’il, 
52 pages. MSS are listed in Sezgin, GAS, v, p. 255, no. 3. As has been noted by M. Schramm 
( Weg, pp. 70 and 82), the printed text omits the last four pages in the copy preserved in the India 
Office Library, London, MS Loth 734 ( i.e . from fol. 46a, line 2 to the end of fol. 47b). A 
German translation, based on the India Office MS, is Karl Kohl, ‘Ober das Licht des Mondes, 
erne Untersuchung von Ibn al-Haitham’, in Sitzungsberichte der Phyzikalisch-medizinischen 
Sozietdt in Erlangen , 56-57 (1924-25), pp. 305-98. Schramm has given a full description of the 
structure of the treatise in Weg, pp. 70-83, followed by corrections of the Hyderabad edition, 
pp. 84-87- M. Nazif has analyzed some off H.’s mathematical arguments in al-Hasan, pp. 391- 
401. For the date of composition of III 6 see above, p. xxvi and n. 17. 


‘essence of celestial bodies’ (i.e. physicists), they also believed that the moon 
received its light from the sun, but they did not support their view with proofs 
and they failed to show how the received light radiates from the moon’s body. 

I. H. then distinguishes three modes of radiation: (d) light may emanate 
from every point on the shining object in all directions (and this is a property 
of self-luminous bodies); or (b) it may be reflected in a determinate direction 
from the surface of an illuminated object (a property of smooth surfaces or 
mirrors); or (c) it may penetrate the object on which it shines (a property of 
transparent bodies). I. H. ’s purpose in this treatise is to show that the acquired 
light of the moon radiates from the lunar surface in the same way as the light of 
self-luminous objects, i.e. from each point on the illuminated surface along all 
straight lines that extend from that point. (In the Optics he states that all 
opaque objects, having become luminous as a result of being illuminated from 
outside, emit light in the same manner as self-luminous bodies.) To establish 
this conclusion I. H. employs arguments in which experimental considera- 
tions and geometrical demonstrations are brilliantly intertwined. In particu- 
lar, his skilful refutation of the hypothesis that the moon acts like a mirror 
shows him at his best as an accomplished geometer. 

In III 48 (On the Light of the Stars ) 47 I. H. sets out to refute the opinion of 
‘certain philosophers’ (qawmutt min al-muta falsi fin) who thought it possible 
( jawwazu ) that the stars (viz. the fixed stars and the five planets) may derive 
their light from the sun, as is the case with the moon. Arguing mainly from 
the observation that those stars (unlike the moon) always exhibit the bright 
shape of a complete circle regardless of their positions in their orbits or in 
relation to the sun, and regardless of the location of the observer, he concludes 
that the stars emit light by virtue of a property inherent in their substance. The 
moon is thus unique among heavenly bodies in being the only one that shines 
with a light borrowed from another heavenly body. 

In III 49 (On the Mark [seen] on the Face of the Moon) I. H. tries his hand at an 
explanation of the dark patches seen on the surface of the moon 48 — a 

47 The Arabic text of III 48 (On the Light of the Stars) has been published as no. I in Rasail , 
8 pages. A list of MSS is in Sezgin, GAS, vi, p. 256, no. 4. Abridged German translation by 
E. Wiedemann, ‘Uber das Licht der Sterne nach Ibn A 1 Haitham\ in Wochenschrifi Jiir Astrono- 
mie, Meteorologie und Geographie , NS, 33 (1890), pp. 129-33; reprinted in Wiedemann, GS, I, 
pp. 80-84. English translation by W. 'Aratat and H. J. J. Winter, The light of the stars: a short 
discourse by Ibn al-Haytham’, in British Journal for the History of Science, 5 (1971), pp. 282-88. 

48 An edition of III 49 (On the Nature of the Mark [seen] on the Face of the Moon) has been 
published by A. I. Sabra in Journal for the History of Arabic Science, 1 (1977), pp. 5-19. C. Schov 
published a German translation as Abhatidlung des Schaichs Ibn r Al i al-Hasati ibn al-Hasati ibn 
al-Haitham iiber die Natur der Spuren [Flecken], die man auf der Oberjiache des Mondes sieht , 
Hannover, 1925. There is a short study by A. Abel, ‘La selenographie d’Ibn A 1 Haitham 
(965-1039) dans ses rapports avec la science grecque’, in Comptes rendus [du] IF Congres National 
des Sciences, Brussels, 19-23 June 1935 - 



xlii Introduction 

phenomenon which had already received a variety of interpretations in 
Antiquity. 49 Could the visible mark ( athar ), which was of a constant shape, 
position and size, be due to the concentration of vapour in a place below the 
moon and in a fixed position relative to it? Or was it an image ( $ura ) reflecting 
the seas or mountains on the earth? Could the spots be shadows cast by 
protruding parts of the moon’s surface? Or were they due to a slight 
transparency in the moon’s body, which allowed the viewer to receive an 
impression of what lay behind it? Having judged all these hypotheses to be 
unsatisfactory, I. H. offers his own solution in the latter part of his treatise. It is 
a rather abstract solution in terms of what he called ‘opacity’ ( kathafa ), a 
property which he took to be responsible not only for obstructing the 
transmission of light but also for reducing the ‘capacity’ of bodies to ‘receive’ 
the light falling upon them. Light was ‘fixed’ in the surface of an illuminated 
opaque body on account of a receptive power which is inherent in the body. 
But since opacity acts as a hindrance to this power, a more opaque body (or 
part of a body) will shine less brightly than a less opaque one. The dark 
appearance of some parts of the moon’s surface was thus due to their greater 
degree of opacity. Having shown the moon (in III 6) to be of a different 
substance from that of all other heavenly bodies, one was not to be surprised 
(according to I. H.) to discover a variation in the body of the moon itself in 
respect of some inherent quality such as opacity. 

Ill 18 (On spherical burning Mirrors ), III 19 (On parabolic burning Mirrors) and 
III 77 (On the burning Sphere) belong together, being all concerned with the 
behaviour of solar rays (shu'd' al-shams) as agents of combustion, not of vision. 
The regular word for visible light, daw \ occurs in III 77 only twice, once at the 
beginning and once again at the end, and is never used in III 18 or III 19. In 
III 18 50 I. H. proves (correctly) the following five propositions concerning 
mirrors that form part of a sphere on whose concave surface the rays from the 
sun fall along lines parallel to the mirror’s axis: (1) All such incident rays will 

49 See Plutarch on ‘The Face of the Moon’, in Moralia , vol. xn (920 A-999 B), with an English 
translation by Harold Cherniss and William C. Helmbold, Loeb Classical Library, Cambridge, 
Mass, and London, 1968, pp. 2-223. 

50 The Arabic text oflll 18, FT al-Maraya al-muhriqa bi-al-dawa'ir , has been published as no. 4 in 
Rasa’il, 16 pages. There is a German translation (based on the London, India Office Library MS 
Loth 734, fols2ib-25a) by E. Wiedemann, ‘Ibn al Haitams Schrift iiber die spharischen 
Hohlspiegel’, in Bibliotheca Mathematical 3rd series, 10(1909-10), pp. 293-307, reprinted in GS, 
1, pp. 354-68; and an English translation (from the same India Office copy) by H. J.J. Winter 
and W. 'Arafat, ‘A Discourse on the concave spherical Mirror by Ibn al-Haitham’, in Journal of 
the Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal, 3rd series: Science, 16 (1950), pp. 1-16. See also E. Wiede- 
mann, ‘Zur Geschichte der Brennspiegel’, in Annalen der Physik und Chemie , NS, 39 (1890), 
pp. 1 10-30, reprinted in Aufsdtze, 11, pp. 739 - 55 - A detailed study of III 18 is in Nazif, al-Hasan , 
pp. 402-20. 


II. Writings on light & vision xliii 

be reflected to points on the axis. (2) If P is a point to which rays are reflected 
from the circumference of a circle on the mirror’s surface, then no other 
reflected rays will pass through P. (3) The distance of P from the mirror’s 
centre is greater than a quarter of the mirror’s diameter. (4) Let c be the 
circumference of the circle whose distance from the mirror’s pole (taraf sahm 
al-mir’ah) is equal to the side of the regular octagon inscribed in a great circle of 
the sphere; then rays reflected from c will all meet at the centre of the mirror. 
(5) Let the circumference at which reflection occurs be at a distance d from the 
mirror’s pole; then reflected rays will pass (a) through the pole, or (b) through 
a point on the axis outside the sphere, or (r) through a point on the axis inside 
the sphere, according to which one of the following conditions obtains: d is 
equal to the side of the regular hexagon inscribed in a great circle of the sphere; 
d is greater than that but smaller than the side of the inscribed square; or d is less 
than the side of the regular inscribed hexagon. These five propositions, 
whatever their ultimate sources, together make up the most complete and 
most coherent account of spherical burning mirrors that we have from any 
writer in Antiquity or in the Middle Ages up to I. H.’s time. 

In contrast to III 18, which cites no sources, III 19 51 begins with a historical 
introduction in which I. H. briefly describes the contributions of his prede- 
cessors to the subject of burning mirrors as these contributions were known to 
him. The ‘ancients’, he says, were aware that solar rays were reflected to a 
single point from a single point on a plane mirror and from the circumference 
of a single circle on the concave surface of a spherical mirror. Both properties, 
he adds, are ‘plainly proved in their books’. To improve burning power, some 
of the ancients used a muliplicity of plane or spherical mirrors. ‘Famous’ 
among those who employed such systems of mirrors were ‘Archimedes and 
Anthemius and others’. Then the ancients turned to the investigation of the 

51 The Arabic text of III 19, FT al-Maraya al-muhriqa bi-al-qutu\ has been published as no. 3 in 
Rasa’il , 15 pages. For a manuscript of this work not recorded in Brockelmann, see A. I. Sabra, 
‘A Note on Codex Biblioteca Medicea Laurenziana, Or. 1 52’, in Journal for the Flistory oj Arabic 
Science , 1 (1977), pp. 276-83, esp. pp. 282-83. A Latin translation, possibly by Gerard of 
Cremona, has been published together with a German translation from the Arabic (as preserved 
in India Office MS Loth 734, fols i8a-2ia) by J. L. Heiberg and E. Wiedemann, ‘Ibn al Haitams 
Schrift iiber parabolische Hohlspiegel’, in Bibliotheca Mathematica , 3rd series, 10 (1909-10), 
pp. 201-37, reprinted in GS, I, pp. 369-405. See also E. Wiedemann, ‘Uber geometrische 
Instrumente bei den muslimischen Volkern’, in Zeitschrift fur Vermessungswesen , nos 22-23 
(1910), pp. 1-8; see Wiedemann, GS, 1, pp. 417-33, and idem, ‘Geschichte der Brennspiegel’, 
cited in the preceding note. An English translation of III 19 is H.J.J. Winter and W. 'Arafat, 
‘Ibn al-Haitham on the paraboloidal focusing Mirror’, in Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of 
Bengal , 3rd ser., Science, 15 (1949), pp. 25— 40. An analysis of III 19 is in Nazif, al-Hasan , 
pp. 475-79. Twenty manuscripts of the medieval Latin translation are listed in D. C. Lindberg, 
A Catalogue of Medieval and Renaissance Optical Manuscripts , Toronto, 1975, pp. 20-21. .Apart 
from the Optics , III 19 is the only optical work by I. H. that was rendered into Latin in the 
Middle Ages. 


xliv Introduction 

properties of conic sections in so far as they related to reflection. They found 
that rays (parallel to the axis) would be reflected from the entire concave 
surface of a paraboloid of revolution to a single point, and thus they realized 
that burning would be strongest by means of such a surface. ‘But they did not 
satisfactorily explain the demonstration of this notion, nor did they show the 
way by which this discovery ( istinbat ) was made’. 52 I. H. thus claims to offer, 
in III 19, the first satisfactory proof of the focal property of the parabola. His 
claim is supported by the available historical evidence: the Conics of Apollo- 
nius (which was known to him) inexplicably omits all mention of that 
property, and a proof by Diodes (Pearly second century b.c.) which may have 
been known to him (note the words ‘and others’) can indeed be described as 
unsatisfactory in that it takes for granted a proposition which is not to be 
found in Apollonius’ Conics . 53 It is likely, but not certain, that I. H. was also 
directly acquainted with the work by Anthemius On burning Mirrors which 
had been utilized by earlier Islamic scholars, such as al-Kindl, 'Utarid ibn 
Muhammad al-Hasib and Ahmad ibn f Isa. 54 

52 Rasd'il, no. 3, p. 3, lines 4-5. 

53 Cf G. J. Toonier, Diodes on burning Mirrors. The Arabic Translation of the lost Greek Original , 
edited with English translation and commentary, Berlin/ Heidelberg/New York, 1976, Intro- 
duction, sec. 4. ii, esp. p. 15; and sec. 5, esp. pp. 22-23. 

54 Anthemius of Tralles, the architect ot'Hagia Sophia, lived in the sixth century a.d. Only a 
fragment of the Greek text of his book On Paradoxical Devices , Peri paradoxedn mechanematon , has 
survived — seej. L. Heiberg (ed.), Mathematici Graeci Minor es, Copenhagen, 1927, pp. 78-87; 
and G. L. Huxley, Anthemius of Tralles: A Study in later Greek Geometry , Cambridge, Mass., 
1959. An Arabic translation of this work (? or of part of it) was available in the ninth century, as 
is attested by Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Kindl who quotes from it in a work on burning mirrors, an 
incomplete text of which has been published by M. Y. Haschmi with the title Matarih al-shua c 
(‘Propagation ofRays’), Aleppo, 1967. 'Utarid ibn Muhammad, a mathematician mentioned in 
the Fihrist of Ibn al-Nadim (composed in a.d. 987), in a work also concerned with burning 
mirrors, cites ‘the book of Anthemius on the construction of burning mirrors’ ( Kitab anthim(u)s 
ft 'atnal al-mardyd al-muhriqa ), which he says he has read. 'Utarid tells us that his own treatise is a 
revision of that book of Anthemius to which he added his own observations (md waqa'a ilayya ) 
and which he corrected ( sahhahtuhu ) by reference to what he gathered from ‘the book of 
Nathasus, also on burning mirrors’. The latter work could not have been simply another copy 
of the text attributed to ‘Anthimus’, since 'Utarid was not able to tell whether or not 
‘Anthimus’ and ‘Nathasus’ were the same author (Ja-in kdna Nathasus huwa hadhd Anthimus 
ja-al-jam'u minnt li-kitabin wdhidin . . . wa in yakun ghayrahu fa-qad adafna naw'ati min al- e ilmi ild 
shaklihi . . .); cf. MS Laleli 2759, fols 1-20, esp. fol. lb. See M. Schramm, ‘Ibn al-Haythams 
Stellung in der Geschichte der Wissenschaften’, pp. 15-16, where it is suggested that 'Utarid 
may have belonged to the early ninth century a.d. (p. 15 and n. 54). In the section of his Optics 
devoted to burning mirrors, Ahmad ibn 'Isa twice cites ‘Anthemius’ book on the reflection of 
rays (in'ikas al-shu'd *) from burning mirrors’ (MS Laleli 2759, fol. 48a and fol. 58a; MS Ragip 
Pa§a 934, fol. 29b and fol. 40a). 

The reference to Archimedes in the text quoted above from I. H. may have been taken from 
Anthemius’ book, or even more indirectly from authors dependent upon it, such as al-Kind! or, 
especially, Ahmad ibn 'Isa (MS Laleli 2759, fols 6ob-62a; MS Ragip Pa$a 934, fols 432-44^. 


II. Writings on light & vision xlv 

Neither III 18 nor III 19 refers to the other and there is no reference in either 
to other works by I. H. In both of them I. H. goes beyond exposition of the 
theories of spherical and parabolic mirrors to explain in detail how to 
construct mirrors of these types from steel. These two treatises thus belong to 
the history of technological ideas as well as to the history of optics. 

In III 77 (On the burning Sphere ) 55 I. H. shows that a sphere ‘of glass, crystal 
or the like’ will refract parallel rays from the sun at the circumference of a circle 
on the sphere to a single point outside the sphere on the line that joins the 
centres of the sun and the sphere. In showing this, and in his remarkable 
investigation of the phenomenon now called ‘spherical aberration’, he relies 
on the rules of refraction set forth in Book VII of his Optics , to which he refers. 
He further investigates the behaviour of rays refracted into the glass sphere as 
the points of incidence gradually recede from the ‘pole’ of the sphere facing the 
sun. Assuming values for the angles of incidence and refraction which he 
obtains from the refraction tables in Book V of Ptolemy’s Optics, I. H. shows 
that the points of second refraction (where the rays emerge from the sphere) 
will similarly recede from the opposite pole of the sphere, reaching a 
maximum distance from it when the angles of first incidence reach 50°, and 
begin to move in the opposite direction. 

The Arabic translation of Aristotle’s Meteorology (as represented in a text 
prepared by Yahya ibn al-Bitriq in the ninth century) 56 lacks the entire passage 
(from 375 b i9 to 377*29) in which an attempt is made to give a geometrical 
explanation of the shape and size of the rainbow. For all we know, this may be 
only a feature of the extant manuscripts of Ibn al-Bitriq’s text; but even if this 
passage was already missing from the Greek (or Syriac) original from which 
this translation was made, its contents may have become known to Islamic 

55 There is no edition of the complete Arabic text of III 77, which has been preserved in 
MS Atif Efendi 1714, fols 9ib-ioob, dated a.h. 1158/A.D. 1745, but a recension by Kamal 
al-DIn al-Farisi (based on two copies available to him) has been published in Tanqih , n, 
pp. 285-302 (see p.297, line 7). E. Wiedemann has published a German translation of this 
recension in ‘Uber die Brechung des Lichtes in Kugeln nach Ibn al-Haitam und Kamal al Dm al 
Farisi’, in Sitzungsberichte der Physikalisch-medizinischen Sozietat in Erlangen , 42 (19x0), pp. 15- 
58, esp. pp. 16-35; reprinted in Aufsdtze , r, pp. 597-640. A full critical account of III 77, also 
based on Kamal al-DIn’s version, is in Nazlf, al-Hasan , pp. 790-809. 

56 The text of Ibn al-Bitriq has been edited twice: by 'Abdurrahman Badawi, Aristutdlis: fi 
al-Samd’ wa al-Athdr al-'ulwiyya, Cairo, 1961, pp. 1-121; and by Casimir Petraitis, The Arabic 
Version of Aristotle's Meteorology . A critical Edition with an Introduction and Greek- Arabic Glossaries, 
Beirut, 1967. The latter has used a copy of the text in Hebrew characters (Codex Vaticanus 
Hebraicus 378, fols 1-16 and 60-71) and the Arabic text of Averroes’ Middle Commentary on 
Aristotle’s Meteorology as preserved in the Oxford MS Hatton Or. 34, fols 74-104, also in 
Hebrew characters, in addition to the Istanbul MS Yeni Cami 1179 (fols 3a-4ob) used by 
Badawi. See the Introduction to Petraitis’ edition, pp. 68-70. 


xlvi Introduction 

scholars through Arabic translations of Greek commentaries on the Meteor- 
ology, in particular those by Alexander of Aphrodisias and Olympiodorus. 57 
We know that I. H. was acquainted with one version or another of Aristotle’s 
work, a ‘Summary’ of which he prepared some time between io February 
1027 and 25 July 1028. 58 This summary is now lost, but I. H.’s own treatise On 
the Rainbow and the Halo (no. Ill 8), which is extant, 59 departs significantly 
from the Aristotelian explanation, though it shares some fundamental features 
of it. I. H., for example, puts the sun, the observer’s eye and the centre of the 
bow on the same straight line, as in Aristotle. But whereas the latter has the 
observer at the centre of the spherical cloud from whose surface the ‘visual 
rays’ are reflected to the sun, I. H. places him between that centre and the point 
where the reflecting surface cuts the line passing through the sun and the eye. 

I. H. further takes into account the fact that the sun is ‘much farther’ from the 

eye than the cloud, a fact certainly known to Aristotle but ignored in his 
representation. And, again in contrast to Aristotle, I. H.’s account strictly , 

57 Ibn al-Nadlm reports ( Fihrist , p.251) that a 'large commentary’ (shark kabir) on the 
Meteorology by Olympiodorus was translated (into Arabic) by Abu Bishr Matta, and that a 
certain al-Tabari took down notes on this commentary from Abu Bishr ('allaqahu \mhu 
al-Tabari ). Since we know that Abu Bishr (d. 940) was innocent of Greek, we have to assume 
that this translation was made from Syriac. Ibn al-Nadim states further that a commentary 
(shark) by Alexander was rendered into Arabic ‘without its having been translated into Syriac’. 

He then adds in an ambiguous sentence which may refer to Alexander’s commentary or, more 

likely, to Aristotle’s work itself, that ‘it was translated afterwards (Ji-ma ba'd) by Yahya ibn 'Adi 

[d. a.d. 974) into Arabic from Syriac’. None of these translations is extant. We have in Arabic, 

however, a Tafsir (? paraphrase, epitome) of the Meteorology, which has been translated by f 

Hunayn ibn Ishaq and revised by his son Ishaq and attributed to Olympiodorus (published by 

'Abdurrahman Badawl in Shuruh e ala Aristu mafquda fi al-yundniyya wa rasa’il ukhra, Beirut, } 

1971, pp. 83-190). As has been noted by Badawl, the text of this Tajsir is quite different from 

the Greek text of Olympiodorus’ Scholia published by G. Stiive in Commentaria in Aristotelem 

Graeca, vol. xu, pars II, and, unlike the Scholia, it does not discuss the mathematical passage in 

Aristotle’s Meteorology. We also know that Alexander’s Commentary was accessible to al- 

Mas'udl (d. a.d. 956-57), to Ibn al-Khammar (d. c. a.d. 1017) and to Averroes (d. a.d. 1198). 

See on the (still unclear) Arabic tradition of Aristotle’s Meteorology: F. E. Peters, Aristoteles 
Arabus, Leiden, 1968, pp. 39-40; Sezgin, GAS, vn. Index; esp. p. 226 (on Alexander) and 
pp. 229-30 (on Olympiodorus). 

SB The title ot no 16 in List II ot I. H.’s writings is Talkhis Kitab al-Athar al-'ulwiyya li-Aristutalts. 

59 The text of III 8 (On the Rainbow and the Halo) is extant in MS Atif Efendi 1714, fols 126b- 
138a. Kamal al-DIn al-FarisI made a recension (tahrir) of this work from the author’ autograph 
dated Rajab 419 (26 July-24 August 1028), and this has been published in al-Farisi’s Tanqth , 

II, 258-79. E. Wiedemann published a paraphrase of the recension in ‘Theorie des Regenbogens 
von Ibn al Haitam’, in Sitzungsberichte der Physikalisch-medizinischen Sozietat in Erlangen , 46 
(1914), pp. 39“56; reprinted in Aufsatze, 11, pp. 69-86. Discussions are in Nazlf, al-Hasan , 
pp. 425-29; J. Lohne, ‘Regenbogen und Brechzahl’, in Sudhoffs Archiv, 49 (1965), pp. 401-15; 

M. Schramm, ‘Steps towards the Idea of Function. A Comparison between Eastern and 
Western Science ot the Middle Ages’, in History of Science, 4(1965), pp. 70-103, esp. pp. 81—85; 
and R. Rashed, ‘Le modele de la sphere transparente et 1 ’explication de Tarc-en-ciel: Ibn 
al-Havtham, al-Farisf, Revue d’histoire des sciences, 23 (1970), pp. 109-40, esp. pp. 116-20. 


II. Writings on light & vision xlvii 

observes the equality of angles in reflection. 60 The gist of his approach, in fact, 
was to reduce the rainbow problem to a special case of reflection from 
spherical concave mirrors, namely the case in which the eye and the visible 
object (the sun) both lie on the diameter of the mirror, on different sides of the 
mirror’s centre and at unequal distances from it. In this form, I. H. ’s ‘explana- 
tion’ was more closely related to his own investigation of concave mirrors in 
Book V of his Optics , 61 and to Ptolemy’s study of the same subject, 62 than to 
Aristotle. (Ill 8 does not, however, refer to either work.) If the cloud did not 
act exactly like a mirror by not showing an image of the sun, this was, 
according to I. H., because the tiny parts of the cloud were apt to reflect the 
colour but not the form of the sun (as Aristotle had also postulated). The 
multiplicity of colours, always understood as mixtures of light and darkness, 
was due to the various degrees of penetration of solar rays into the thick cloud 
before being reflected to the eye. The same account is found in Averroes, 

60 A detailed analysis of Aristotle’s rainbow theory is in Carl B. Boyer, The Rainbow. From 
Myth to Mathematics , New York/London, 1959, pp. 38-55; see especially pp. 41-46 for features 
of the Aristotelian treatment which are mentioned above. 

61 In Figure 2, let O, C and S be three points on the diameter of the concave spherical mirror 
with radius CP, such that the centre C lies between O and S. and let CS be greater than CO. In 
Book V of the Optics I. H. shows that point P from which the light may be reflected from S to O 
(or vice versa) is determined by the condition: MS : MO > CS : CO, where M is the intersection 
of the mirror’s diameter with its surface on the side of O (MS Fatih 3215, fols 267a-270a). 



In III 8, O and S are taken to represent the positions of the observer and the sun respectively. 
R, the foot of the perpendicular from P on the spherical cloud, is the centre of the bow whose 
shape is thus shown to be a segment of the circle produced by rotating the figure about MS. See 
Nazlf, al-Hasan, pp. 421-24 (quoting MS Fatih 3215, fols 267a-27oa) and pp. 425-29. Implicit 
in I. H.’s method for determining the size of the bow is the use of a locus theorem which 
Eutocius attributed to Apollonius but which was known to Aristotle and used by him for the 
same purpose (see Boyer, Rainbow, pp. 45-46; T. L. Heath, Mathematics in Aristotle, Oxford, 
1949, pp. 181-83). 

62 Cf Ptolemaei Optica, Props. 37-43; and Lejeune, Recherches, pp. 72-73- 


xlviii 


Introduction 


II. Writings on light & vision 


xlix 


whose ‘Middle Commentary 1 on Aristotle’s Meteorology appears to imply that 
he was acquainted with I. H. ’s treatise On the Rainbow and the Halo . 63 

In Section 4 of his Commentary on the Almagest I. H. enters into a lengthy 
discussion of gnomon shadows in which he repeatedly refers to ‘the book of 
Ibrahim ibn Sinan on Shadows’. 64 At one point in the discussion he reports: 
‘And I have explained the subject of shadows, their properties and all that 
relates to them of astronomical matters in a book exclusively devoted to this 
subject (jikitdbin mufrad )\ 65 This cannot be a reference to III 36 (On the Quality 
of Shadows ), 66 since the Commentary certainly predated the Optics (III 3) and the 
Optics is mentioned in III 36. 67 It is therefore relevant to note that List la, 
which includes the title plausibly identifiable with the extant Commentary , also 
includes the following title (no. Ia 21) of a work on shadows: ‘A Book on the 
Shadow Instrument, which I have abridged from the book of Ibrahim ibn 
Sinan on the subject’ ( Kitab ft Alat al-zill, ikhtasartuhu wa lakhkhastuhu mitt 
Kitab Ibrahim ibn Sinan fidhalik). 

By I. H.’s time the study of shadow instruments ( alat al-azlal , gnomons, 
sundials) had come to be regarded as a distinct branch of astronomy to which 
the name ' ilm al-azlal (the science of shadows) was applied. Writers on this 
branch of inquiry were called ashab al-azlal (authors on shadows) and their 
writings were referred to as kutub al-azlal (the books on shadows). 68 I. H.’s 
treatise On the Quality of Shadows does not belong in this category, not being 
concerned with the use of shadow instruments as such, but its relation to 
astronomy is clearly stated in the opening sentences in which the author 
explains his purpose: 


63 See below, Commentary, note on Bk I, ch. i, para. [2]. 

64 MS Ahmet III 3329,fols 87a-98b. 

65 MS Ahmet III 3329, fol. 90a, lines 8-9. 

66 Two manuscript copies of III 36 are listed in Krause’s ‘Stambuler Handschriften, p. 475: 
AtifEfendi 1714, fols 3ia~46a (a.h. 1158) and Fatih 3439, fols I24a-i 30b (Krause: fols 62a-73b, 
this being an older pagination) (a.h. 587). A third copy has been noted more recently in the 
Lemn Kuibyshev Regional Library (c/. B. A. Rozenfeld, in Historia Mathematics 2 [1975], 
p. 69). A recension by Kamal al-Dinhas been published in Tanqih , 11, pp. 358-81, and a German 
translation of this recension (from the Leiden MS of the Tanqih, Or. 201) has been published by 
E. Wiedemann, ‘Uber eine Schrift von Ibn al Haitam “Uber die Beschaffenheit der Schatten” 
in Sitzungsberichte der Physikalisch-medizinischen Sozietdt in Erlangen , 39 (1907), pp. 226-48, 
reprinted in Aufsdtze , 1, pp. 377-99. Cf. Nazlf, al-liasan , pp. 170-80. 

67 The possibility also exists that the sentence quoted above may be a later addition to the 
original text of the Commentary on the Almagest. 

68 For a critical survey of the literature on shadows by a contemporary of I. H.’s, see The 
Exhaustive Treatise on Shadows by Abu Al-Rayhdn . . . al-Biruni, translation and commentary by 
E. S. Kennedy, 2 vols, Aleppo, 1976. 


The shadows cast by opaque bodies illuminated from one side constitute one of the 
bases on which we rely in the science of astronomy, in [the study of] the motions of 
the sun and moon, in the determination of times, the number of hours, the position 
of the sun at all times of daylight, and in estimating the extent and duration of lunar 
eclipses. Now shadows differ in shape according to the different sizes of the shining 
and the shadow-casting bodies, and they also vary in strength and weakness 
according to variation in magnitude and [intensity of] the light of the shining 
bodies. We have found that all who have discoursed on the science of shadows, and 
all who have worked with shadows, have followed one and the same course in 
[determining] the shape of all [shadows]. When we looked closely into the nature of 
the quality of shadows and thoroughly examined their different shapes and their 
varying quality in respect of strength and weakness, we discovered that the course 
followed by the practitioners of the science of shadows and the users of shadows is 
neither precise nor thorough. We also discovered that every notion which they have 
established by means of shadows is vitiated by error owing to their lack of precision 
in determining the quality and shape of shadows. We have therefore decided to 
explain briefly this concept, viz. the shape of shadows, and precisely verify the 
quality of shadows in respect of strength and weakness so that all that is determined 
by their means in the science of astronomy can be truly established . . , 69 

Thus although the ultimate aim of III 36 is to provide a sound foundation 
for certain considerations within the science of astronomy, the treatise itself, 
being a study of the physical properties of shadows as governed by the 
rectilinear propagation of light, must be regarded as belonging to the field of 
optics. 

At the beginning of III 80 (On the Form of the Eclipse ) 70 1 . H. formulated the 
problem to which he wished to address himself in that work as follows: why 
did the sun in partial eclipse cast a crescent-shaped image through a narrow 
circular opening, whereas the crescent (or partially eclipsed) moon always cast 
a circular image through the same opening? The problem had already been 
posed in somewhat similar terms in the pseudo-Aristotelian Problemata , a 
work which, in some form, was available to I. H. and which he abridged or 


69 MS AtifEfendi 17x4, fol. 31b. 

70 For MSS of III 80 see Sezgin, GAS, Vi, p. 257, no. 8. 1 have consulted the following: Fatih 
3439, fols 55a-6ib, dated a.h. 586/ a.d. 1190, incomplete; Leningrad, Asiatic Museum, Or. 
B 1030 (— Oriental Institute 89), fols 21a— 47b, incomplete; London, India Office, Loth 734* 
fols 79a-86b. Kamal al-Dln’s recension is published in Tanqih , 11, pp. 381-401. E. Wiedemann 
has published a German translation based on the India Office MS in ‘Uber die Camera obscura bei 
Ibn al Haitam’, in Sitzungsberichte der Physikalisch-medizinischen Sozietdt in Erlangen , 46 (1914), 
pp. 155-69, reprinted in Aufsdtze , 11, pp. 87-101. An extensive analysis is in Nazlf al-Hasan y 
pp. 180-204. 


1 Introduction 

paraphrased some time before the end of a.h. 417 (10 February 1027). 71 That 
III 80 was written after the Optics is made clear by the fact that in it I. H. refers 
the reader to Book I of the Optics for an experimental proof of the principle: 
from every point on the surface of a shining object light issues in all the 
straight lines that extend from that point. The principle is basic to his 
treatment of the problem of how images are formed through narrow aper- 
tures. Thus the light from a single point on the luminous object and passing 
through the circular opening will form a cone limited by the circumference of 
the opening; and if that light is received on a screen, the image cast by the 
luminous point will be a patch of light forming the base of the cone. This 
being true for every point on the object, I. H. goes on to state a condition for 
obtaining a distinct image of the whole object: the image will be distinct when 
the light patches cast by two ‘extreme’ points on the object do not overlap, and 
the total image will be clearer the farther the patches illuminated by two such 
points are from one another. This means that for a clear image to be obtained, 
the aperture’s diameter should not exceed the limit at which the two patches 
touch one another. I. H. formulates the condition geometrically for the case in 
which a circular object and aperture and the plane of the screen are all parallel 
to one another: the two light patches will touch when the ratio of the diameter 
of the aperture to that of the object is equal to the ratio of the screen’s distance 
from the aperture to its distance from the object. I. H. then considers the 
double solids of light formed by radiation from all points on the crescent sun 
through a single point in the aperture: on both sides of the aperture the two 
solids will be limited by a convex and a concave surface in reverse positions, 
and thus a reversed crescent image will be cast on the screen. He also considers 
the effect of single cones formed by radiations from every single point on the 
sun through all points in the circular opening: each will cast a circular image on 
the screen. He then tries to construct a crescent image as the visible resultant of 
overlapping crescent images produced by the single cones. Finally, and on the 
basis of faulty measurements derived from the Almagest (the solar diameter is 
eighteen and four-fifths times the lunar diameter), 1 . H. tries to give an answer 
to the question posed at the beginning of his treatise. His answer recognizes 
the theoretical possibility of obtaining a crescent image for the crescent moon, 
but he considers that the conditions of the arrangement are such that such an 
image will be too faint to be visible. Though I. H. did not succeed in solving 

71 The title no. 22 in List ib of I. H.’s writings reads: Talkhis al-Masa’il al-tabi'iyya li-Aristutalis 
(‘Paraphrase of Aristotle’s Physical Problems'). The [Aristotelian] passage in question is in 
Book XV, para. 11; see W. S. Hett’s English translation in the Loeb edition of the Problems , 
vol. 1 (Cambridge, Mass, and London, 1961), p. 341. On the Arabic tradition of this work see 
F. E. Peters, Aristoteles Arabus , Leiden, 1968, pp. 66-67; M. Ullmann, Die Medizin im Islam, 
Leiden, 1970, pp. 93~97- 


, II. Writings on light & vision li 

the general problem of the pinhole camera, his treatise (composed, as we have 
noted, after the Optics) clearly shows that he understood the working of the 
camera. 

In the above account I have used the word ‘image’ to denote what I. H. 
called ‘the form of the sun’s [or moon’s] light’ ( surat daw 3 al- shams), and it is 
worth observing that what he designated by that expression is simply a patch 
1 of light having a certain shape. As M. Nazif has noted, there is no description 

in I. H. ’s Optics of a picture obtained by means of a narrow opening, nor is such 
a description to be found in any of his extant writings. 72 

The short Discourse ott Light (III 60) 73 is a succinct exposition of I. H.’s 
doctrine of light. Much of it is a summary of arguments and experimental 
results more fully expounded in the Optics , to which it makes frequent 
references; but a characteristic feature of the Discourse is its ready use of certain 
? Aristotelian terms which are noticeably absent from the Optics. It begins with 

a distinction between two modes of inquiry into light: one is concerned with 
5 the ‘essence’ (nuViyya) or nature of light, or of transparency or of the ray, and 

this belongs to natural science; and the other is concerned with such things as 
the shape of the ray or the ‘manner’ (kayfiyya) in which rays extend themselves 
in transparent bodies, and this belongs to mathematical science. It follows that 
a (complete) investigation of light, the ray and transparency must combine the 
natural and the mathematical sciences. 

j There are two views of the nature of light. Philosophers (the word is not 

( used pejoratively), starting from the distinction between ‘essential’ and 

| ‘accidental’ forms, regard the light that inheres in self-luminous bodies 

| ( i.e . the stars and fire) as an ‘essential form’ (sura jawhariyya) of those bodies, 

and they regard as an ‘accidental form’ (sura e aradiyya ) the light that exists in 
i bodies illuminated from outside. Mathematicians took their starting point 

elsewhere and, having based themselves on observations of the heating effect 

72 Nazif, al-Hasan , p. 187, n. 1. Kamal al-Dm, by contrast, has reported observations of 

j reversed coloured images (suwar) of clouds and birds on an unlighted white surface placed 

| behind a narrow opening ( Tanqih , 11, p. 399). See A. I. Sabra, ‘Form in Ibn al-Haytham’s 

Theory of Vision’; below, comment (b) to Bk II, under 'sura'. 

73 The Maqala (or Qawl) Ji al-Daw' (III 60) has been published as no. 2 in Rasail , 19 pages. 
J. Baarmann published an edition of the Arabic text together with a German translation as 
‘Abhandlung iiber das Licht von Ibn al Haitam’, in Zeitschrifi der Deutschen Morgenldndischen 
Gesellschaji , 36 (1882), pp. 195-237; see E. Wiedemann’s remarks on this edition in ibid., 38 
(1884), pp. 145-48. A Cairo edition by 'A. H. MursI correcting Baarmann’s text appeared in 
1938. A critical French translation by R. Rashed is ‘Le “Discours de la lumiere” d’Ibn 
al-Haytham’, in Revue d’histoire des sciences , 21 (1968), pp. 198-224. A recension by Kamal 
al-DIn is in Tanqih , II, pp. 401—07, and a German version of this recension is E. Wiedemann, 

j ‘Uber “Die Darlegung der Abhandlung iiber das Licht” von Ibn al Haitam’, in Annalen der 

( Physik und Chemie, NS, 20 (1883), pp. 337-45, reprinted in GS , 1, pp. 21-29. 


lii Introduction 

of concentrated rays, they have come to consider all light a kind of ‘fiery heat’ 

(i harara nariyya) that exists in the shining bodies from which it permeates the 
surrounding medium. 

All natural bodies, whether opaque or transparent, have the capacity to 
receive light (quwu/a qabila li-l-daw’)\ and transparent bodies have, in addition, 
the capacity to convey or transmit light. As a form, light is ‘fixed* in irradiated 
opaque and transparent bodies on account of the receptive capacity that resides % 

in them. 

Referring to the Optics , I. H. states that observations and experiments with 
‘dark chambers* (sing.: al-bayt al-muzlim) show that light extends in straight 
lines from all points on the shining object through the surrounding medium 
and radiates upon all facing bodies. This extension of light through trans- 
parent bodies is a ‘natural property’ ( khassa tabT'iyya) of all lights, while ‘the 
property of a transparent body is not to prevent the passage of light’ through 
them. ‘Ray’ is the word used to designate the light that extends on straight > 

lines; in the language of the philosophers it is ‘an essential form that stretches 
in straight lines’. ‘Ancient mathematicians’, who believed (wrongly) that i 

vision occurred through the issuing of a ‘luminous power’ from the eye, 
applied the term ‘ray’ ( shua ') to that power together with the straight lines on 
which it extended. On the other hand, physicists (or natural philosophers) 
who believed (correctly) that vision was achieved by the reception of forms 
into the eye, had no precise doctrine (qawl muharrar) regarding the ray. 

Again summarizing some of the arguments in Book I of the Optics , I. H. \ 

introduces the distinction between ‘primary lights’ that issue from self- j 

luminous objects, and the ‘secondary lights* emanating from accidental lights, ] 

stating that both kinds of light proceed in straight lines from all points on the I 

shining or illuminated object, whether the latter is opaque or transparent. j 

There are two classes of transparent body: one is identical with the heavenly jj 

sphere, and the other consists of a group of simple and composite sublunar 3 

bodies such as air, water, glass and crystal. The latter group, though capable J 

of transmitting light, are endowed with a certain degree of opacity which 
allows some of the light to be fixed in them, and it is from this fixed light 
(rather than from the traversing light) that secondary light emanates in all 
directions. Can the same be said of the celestial Sphere? I. H. answers this 
question in the affirmative, maintaining with ‘the mathematicians* that no 
perfectly transparent body exists, while agreeing with Aristotle (sahib al - 
mantiq) that the Sphere is actually the most transparent body in existence. To 
support his view I. H. quotes (in a ‘shorter’ and ‘clearer* form) a proof by ‘one 
of the later mathematicians’, Abu Sa'd al- c Ala* ibn Sahl, to the effect that the 
Sphere is not perfectly transparent. The ‘proof’ hinges upon comparing the 
angles of incidence and refraction when light from a heavenly body enters the j 


II. Aim and scope of the Optics liii 

earth’s atmosphere, and upon regarding these angles as infinitely divisible. 74 
Several copies of the original proof by Abu Sa*d, who is presumed to have 
lived in the second half of the tenth century a.d., are known to exist. 75 

We have already had occasion to cite I. H. *s Dubitationes in Ptolemaeum 
(III 64), 76 a small section of which is a criticism of certain passages in 
Ptolemy’s Optics . 17 Apart from noting (in the earlier part of the treatise) the 
contradiction between Ptolemy’s Almagest and Optics in regard to refraction, 
I. H. has no more to say in this section against Ptolemy than to fault him for 
having failed to produce an adequate list of visible properties, for basing his 
treatment of visual illusions on a false observation, and for misunderstanding 
the working of convex mirrors and the formation of images by refraction. 
This is not unimpressive, but his brief remarks would have been, by them- 
selves, a very insufficient indication of the far-reaching investigations he had 
already carried out in his own Optics. The lesson to be drawn from this is 
obvious. 

Ill 

AIM AND SCOPE OF THE OPTICS 

As we have just seen, the optical writings of l. H. included a number of 
substantial studies on spherical and parabolic burning mirrors, the burning 
sphere, the physical properties of shadows, camera obscura phenomena, and the 
rainbow and halo. And yet none of these subjects is treated as such in his 
Optics\ this book, like Euclid’s and Ptolemy’s treatises of the same title, is 
primarily concerned with problems of vision. 

We have already noted that, some time before 10 February 1027, 1 . H. wrote 
a summary of Euclid’s and Ptolemy’s optical works, in which he proposed a 
reconstruction of the missing first part of Ptolemy’s Optics. This summary, 
like most of I. H.’s early writings, is unfortunately not known to be extant. 
I. H. also wrote a Treatise on Optics according to the Method of Ptolemy (no. Ill 27) 
which may or may not be the same as the ‘treatise’ to which he alludes at the 
end of the Preface to his Optics (paragraph [18]). In the Optics , however, I. H. 
set out to achieve something quite different from what he had done in any of 

74 The modern counterpart of Abu Sa'd’s and I. H. *s view is the doctrine that the speed of light 
in vacuum has a finite magnitude. 

75 A list of these MSS is in Sezgin, GAS, vi, pp 232-33; see also v, pp. 341-42. See below, 
pp. lix-lx. 

76 Above, p. xxxix. 

77 An English translation of this section has been published by A. I. Sabra, ‘Ibn al-Havtham’s 
Criticism of Ptolemy’s Optics', in Journal of the History of Philosophy, 4 (1966), pp. 145-49. 


liv 


Introduction 


III. Aim and scope of the Optics 


lv 


those earlier compositions. His aim was not to write a summary, compen- 
dium, thesaurus or reconstruction of ancient views, but to examine afresh, 
and in a systematic manner, the entire science of vision and to place it on new 
foundations. The result of this ambitious project was most impressive, and it 
did not fail to inspire writers on various aspects of optical science all the way 
up to the seventeenth century. 

I. H. distinguished two main approaches to the study of vision which he 
ascribed to ‘physicists’ (or natural philosophers, ashab al-tabi'a) and to ‘math- 
ematicians’ ( ashab al-taalxm ), respectively. The first of these approaches 
sought to account for visual perception in terms of ‘forms’ received in the eye, 
and the second explained the visible appearances of objects by means of ‘visual 
rays’ assumed to go forth from the eye. Neither approach was in I. H.’s view 
self-sufficient, though each captured a certain amount of the truth. He 
accordingly became convinced that a sound and complete theory of vision 
must bring these two approaches together or, as he put it, must achieve a 
‘synthesis’ ( tarkib ) of physical and mathematical considerations. 

As a first approximation, the synthesis proposed by 1. H. in the Optics can be 
described as an application of the geometrical methods employed by the 
visual-ray theorists (in particular, Euclid and Ptolemy) to the ‘physical’ 
doctrine of forms. It is important to realize, however, that this synthesis was 
not conceived merely in the spirit of eclecticism, nor was it merely a 
juxtaposition of differing views. It implied an outright rejection of all variants 
of the visual-ray hypothesis which mathematicians (and the followers of 
Galen) had espoused, and this was bound to lead to the formulation and 
investigation of new questions. For example, to explain in geometrical terms, 
as I. H. tried to do in Book I of the Optics , how a distinct form (or image) of a 
visible object is produced in the eye, was to pose a problem which does not 
seem to have received attention from adherents of the doctrine of forms, and 
which, probably, would have appeared meaningless or redundant to those 
who thought in terms of rays as a means of actually reaching and visually 
grasping the object. 1. H. realized further that the intromission hypothesis he 
had adopted made it necessary to overcome certain difficulties which, he 
believed, had never been adequately dealt with; and it was the existence of 
these difficulties, he thought, which had conferred plausibility on the oppo- 
site, visual-ray theory. If vision was achieved by means of an impression made 
by the object inside the eye, it had been asked, then why was the object seen 
out there, in front of the visual organ? I. H. ’s own answer to this question was 
that vision was not accomplished without the aid of a ‘faculty of judgement’ 
which performed certain acts of ‘inference’ from the visual impression 
produced in the eye and subsequently conveyed to the brain. He thus 
maintained that a theory based on the intromission hypothesis could not 


qualify as a viable explanation of vision unless it was supplemented and 
supported by a psychological theory setting out the modes of inference that 
were necessarily involved in the perception of visible properties other than the 
effects of light and colour. It was, therefore, no accident that psychological 
considerations came to occupy a considerable part of I. H.’s book. From these 
examples alone it is clear that the Optics not only introduced a new doctrine, 
but also a new methodology for the study of visual perception. 

Nowhere in the Optics does I. H. expound a theory of the nature of light. 
The book is not a philosophical discourse in the manner of Aristotle or his 
commentators, but an experimental and mathematical investigation of the 
properties of light and colour in so far as they relate to the problems of vision. 
The language of the book clearly implies, however, that I. H. had adopted the 
‘established opinion’ of ‘physicists’ or natural philosophers, according to 
which light is a ‘form’ eidos) of the luminous object from which a ‘form’ 
is conveyed to the eye through a transparent medium. Also in agreement with 
Aristotelian doctrine he regarded colour as a quality (or form) which exists in 
the coloured object independently of light. The experimental and mathe- 
matical arguments of the book could have done without this vocabulary of 
forms altogether: no loss of content or intelligibility would ensue if, instead of 
‘form of light’ and ‘form of colour’, one simply read ‘light’ and ‘colour’. But 
the vocabulary of forms serves to remind the reader of the author’s decision to 
explain the initial conditions of vision solely in terms of properties of light and 
colour as objectively existing entities. ‘Form’ thus indicates the ‘physical’ 
orientation of the new theory as manifested in the reversal of the direction of 
rays — a reversal admittedly owed to the writings of natural philosophers. 

The word ‘physical’ can be misleading here. Nowadays we associate 
experiments with what we would call physical inquiry. I. H.’s book, how- 
ever, did not owe its experimental character to those authors whom he would 
call ‘physicists’, i.e. writers in the Aristotelian mode of discourse, but to 
mathematicians like Euclid and Ptolemy. According to a generally accepted 
usage of his time, inherited from the Greeks, I. H. would regard experimental 
optics as a ‘mathematical’ inquiry, just as observational astronomy was 
considered part of the mathematical investigation of celestial phenomena. 
‘Physics’, on the other hand, dealt with questions concerning the ‘nature’ or 
‘essence’ of light, or of heavenly bodies and forces. The inquiry into how light 
and heavenly bodies behaved was, on this understanding, the concern of 
‘mathematical’ science. As we have seen in the previous section, the distinc- 
tion between a physical mode of inquiry in terms of essences and a mathe- 
matical mode in terms of how things behave is explicitly stated by 1. H. in his 
Discourse on Light (see below, Commentary, note on Bk I, ch. i, paragraph 
[ 2 ]). 


lvi Introduction 

For the Greeks, optics proper was a theory of direct vision in terms of visual 
rays that extended rectilinearly from the eye to the object seen. To this there 
had already been added in Euclid’s time a theory of the formation of images in 
mirrors (called ‘catoptrics’) and, finally, a theory of refraction. Thus optics, as 
distinguished for example from the study of burning mirrors and of gnomon 
shadows, came to be conceived of as a theory of vision by means of direct, 
reflected and refracted visual rays. This conception was formed only 
gradually, and although it clearly manifested itself in Ptolemy’s book 
(c. a. D. 170), it remained generally unrecognized or, in any case, unexpressed 
for a long time afterwards. Thus in the century just before Ptolemy, Hero of 
Alexandria divided the science of vision into three parts: (a) optics, a theory of 
vision as illustrated by Aristotle’s [sic] treatment of the subject; (b) dioptrics, 
or the study of sighting instruments or dioptras; and (c) catoptrics, or the 
study of the use of mirrors. 78 Three hundred years after Ptolemy, Proclus 
wrote down, in his Commentary on the First Book of Euclid's Elements , what 
came to be regarded as the classic statement on the subject-matter of Greek 
optics. Reporting a view which he ascribed to Geminus in the first century 
B.c., and which he did not attempt to emend in the light of more recent 
developments (if such were known to him), he presented a division of optics 
into (a) optics proper, characterized as a study (in terms of ‘visual lines’) of 
rectilinear vision and of errors arising in rectilinear vision; (b) a study of 
various modes of reflection responsible for the appearance of specular images; 
and (c) scene painting or the representation of three-dimensional objects on a 
flat surface. 79 

Echoes of these ancient statements are found in a passage written in Arabic 
by the tenth-century philosopher al-Farabl (d. a.d. 950). This rich passage, 
constituting the chapter on optics in al-Farabf s Enumeration of the Sciences , is 
worth quoting in full: 

The science of optics ( 'ilm al-manazir) investigates the same things as does the 
science of geometry, such as figures, magnitudes, order, position, equality and 
inequality, but not in so far as these exist in abstract lines, surfaces and solids, 
whereas geometry investigates them in so far as they exist in abstract lines, surfaces 
and solids. Thus geometrical investigation is more general. But there was need for a 

78 Cf W. Schmidt’s edition of the medieval Latin translation of the non-extant Greek text of 
Hero’s Catoptrics in Heronis Alexandrini Opera quae supersunt omnia, vol. II, fasc. 1, Leipzig, 
1900, pp. 318 f; also M. R. Cohen and I. E. Drabkin, A Source Book in Greek Science , Cam- 
bridge, Mass., 1958, pp. 261—63. We know from the Commentary of Theon of Alexandria on 
the Almagest that a book on Catoptrics by Archimedes included a treatment of refraction — see 
n. 85 below. 

79 See the English translation of Proclus’ Commentary by G. R. Morrow, Princeton, N.J., 
1970, pp. 31-35, esp. p. 33; and Friedlein’s edition of the Greek text, Leipzig, 1873, pp. 38-42, 
esp. p. 40. 


III. Aim and scope of the Optics lvii 

separate science of optics, although [its objects] are included among the objects of 
geometry, because many of the things which are proved in geometry to be of a 
certain shape or position or order or the like, acquire opposite properties when they 
become objects of vision: thus objects which are really square are seen as circular 
when looked at from a distance, and equal objects appear to be unequal and unequal 
ones appear equal, and many objects which are placed in the same plane appear to be 
some lower and some higher, and many foreground objects appear to be farther 
back. And such things are many. By means of this science discrimination is made 
between what is seen as different from what it truly is and what is seen as it truly is; 
and the reasons why all this should be so are established by certain demonstrations. 
And with regard to all that can be subject to visual error, this science explains the 
various devices for avoiding error and apprehending what the seen thing truly is in 
respect of size, shape, position, order, and all that can be mistaken by sight. By 
means of this art (sjna'a), too, one can determine the size of distant and inaccessible 
bodies, the magnitudes of their distances from us and their distances from each 
other. Examples are: the heights of tall trees and walls and the widths of valleys and 
rivers; even the heights of mountains and the depths of valleys, provided that sight 
can reach their limits; the distances of clouds and other objects from our location 
and above any place on the earth; the distances and sizes of celestial bodies, et totum 
ad quod possibile est peruenire a reflexione aspicientis ipsum (wa kullu ma yumkinu an 
yuddfa ilayhd [or: ayyuma yumkinu an yunzara ilayhd] 'an inhirafi manazirihd). In 
general, every visible magnitude of which the size or distance from something else 
we seek to know, [can be determined] sometimes by means of instruments which 
are made for guiding the passage of sight so that it may not err, and sometimes 
without such instruments. Now all that can be looked at and seen is seen by means 
of a ray that penetrates the air or any transparent body in contact with our eyes until 
it reaches the object seen. And rays that pass through transparent bodies to a visible 
object are either straight ( mustaqtma ) or deflected ( mun'atifa ) or reversed ( mun'akisa ) 
or bent (munkasira). Straight rays are those that, having issued from the eye, extend 
rectilinearly on the line of sight until they weaken and come to an end ( ila an takhur 
wa tanqati'). Deflected rays are those that, having passed out of the eye, meet on 
their way, and before they weaken, a mirror that precludes them from passing 
through in a straight line, thereby causing them to be deflected ( tan'atij) and turned 
to one side of the mirror. They then extend in the direction into which they have 
turned towards the beholder. Reversed rays are those that return from the mirror 
on the path they traversed at first, until they fall on the body of the beholder from 
whose eyes they have issued, and it is by means of this [kind of] ray that the 
beholder sees himself. Bent rays are those that return from the mirror towards the 
beholder from whose eyes they have issued, but extend obliquely beside him until 
they fall on something else behind the beholder or on his right or his left or above 
him, and it is thus that we see what lies behind or beside us. 

The medium that lies between the eye and what is looked at is, in general, a 
transparent body, whether air or water or a celestial body or an earthly composite 
body such as glass or the like. And mirrors, which send back the rays and prevent 


Iviii Introduction 

them from rectilinearly passing through, are either those made by us of iron or the 
like, or they consist ofa thick moist vapour, or water, or some other body similar to 
these. 

The science of optics, then, inquires into all that is looked at and seen by means of 
these four rays and into every kind of mirror and all that pertains to the object of 
vision. It is divided into two parts, the first of which investigates what is visible 
through rectilinear rays, and the second investigates what is visible through 
non-rectilinear rays, and this [latter] is specially called the science of mirrors ('ilm 
al-maraya). 80 

It will be noticed that none of the above statements makes any reference to 
vision through refracted rays. This is not really surprising, even in the case of 
al-Farabl who was writing eight hundred years after Ptolemy and some fifty 
years or longer after Ptolemy’s Optics had presumably passed into the hands of 
Islamic scholars. 81 For all the historical evidence we have points to the fact that 
Ptolemy’s book was little known and used both in Antiquity and in the Islamic 
Middle Ages almost up to I. H.’s time. 

It is not known exactly when or by whom the Optics of Ptolemy was 
translated into Arabic. It has been argued that the book was known to Abu 
Yusuf Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Kindl who died c. a.d. 870, and indeed this is 
strongly suggested by similarities between certain passages in al-Kindf s De 
aspectibus and in Ptolemy’s Optics . 62 It is noticeable, however, that the De 
aspectibus makes no mention of optical refraction, a subject to which Ptolemy 

80 In the absence of a single satisfactory edition, the above translation has been made from a 
composite text constructed from two editions of the Arabic text and the Latin version ascribed 
to Gerard of Cremona: 'Uthman Amin (ed.), Ihsa al-'ulum Ii[-Abl Nasrj al-Farabi , 2nd ed. 
Cairo, 1949, pp. 79-83; Alfarabi: Catalogo de las ciencias , edition y traduction castellana por 
Angel Gonzalez Palencia, Madrid, 1932, pp. 36-39 (Arabic), and pp. 148-51 (Latin). I have not 
translated the clause reproduced above in Arabic and Latin because I do not understand it in 
either language. It is worth noting that in Hunayn ibn Ishaq’s Ten Treatises on the Eye (ed. 
Meyerhof, p. 109, Arabic, lines 7-10), as in al-Farabi’s text, the terms in'ikas and inkisdr both 
denote modes of reflection ( ruju\ turning back) of visual rays ( mandzir ) or visual lines ( khutiit 
al-basar ) from polished surfaces. 

81 It may be noted that the fact of refraction had been clearly stated in Aetius’ Placita 
philosophorum , a work which had become available to Arabic readers in a translation by Qusta 
ibn Luqa (d. a.d. 912). In a paragraph concerned with the rainbow, three modes of vision are 
distinguished: rectilinear, reflected and refracted. It is stated that the objects we see ‘on bent 
lines’ ( e ala khutut munhaniya) are those which we see in water, ‘for the sight bends (yanhanx) 
because of the density of the water, and for this reason we see poles bent in the sea water when 
looked at from a distance’; see the Arabic text and German translation in Hans Daiber, Aetius 
Arabus: Die Vorsokratiker in arabischer Uberliejerung, Wiesbaden, 1980, pp. 174 and 175. 
Refraction was also the subject of a brief and unenlightened discussion in the Optics of Ahmad 
ibn 'Isa; see above, pp. xxxvi-xxxvii and n. 39. 

82 See the remarks by S. Vogl in Alkindi , Tideus und Pseudo- Euklid: Drei optische Werke, 
herausgegeben und erklart von A. Bjombo und S. Vogl, Abhandlungen zur Geschichte der 
mathematischen Wissenschaften, xxvi. 3, Leipzig/Berlin, 1912, pp. 42-70 passim. 


III. Aim and scope of the Optics iix 

had devoted the entire fifth part of his work. Nor can the extent or character of 
al-Kindf s knowledge of refraction be determined from his other extant 
writings. The title of one of his non-extant treatises, FT al- Mandzir al-falakiyy a, 
has been interpreted as implying a discussion of atmospheric refraction. 83 But 
this cannot simply be read off the title which may have referred, for example, 
to parallactic phenomena, usually called ikhtilaf al-manzar. Al-Kindl is also 
reported to have written a ‘large’ treatise On Bodies immersed in Water ( Risala - 
tuhu al-kabira Jial-Ajram al-gha*isa fi al-md’) which Ibn al-Nadim lists among a 
large number of writings on sundry subjects (anwa'iyyat) including two on 
burning mirrors. 84 But we have no idea of its precise content. In the Almagest 
(1, 3) Ptolemy referred briefly to the apparent enlargement of bodies placed in 
water, and the observation is repeated in Arabic astronomical works. But 
merely to mention this phenomenon does not imply an understanding of 
refraction such as we find in Ptolemy’s Optics. Two instructive examples are 
provided by the Optics of Ahmad ibn 'Isa and I. H.’s Commentary on the 
Almagest , in both of which a primitive and certainly pre-Ptolemaic (and 
pre- Archimedean) treatment of the phenomenon in question is given. 85 

For an incontestable witness to Ptolemy’s Optics in Islam before the 
eleventh century we have to turn to the late tenth-century mathematician Abu 
Sa'd al-'Ala’ ibn Sahl whose little treatise on atmospheric refraction (already 
mentioned) 86 is extant. The full title of this treatise is ‘A Proof of the Fact that 
the (celestial) Sphere is not perfectly transparent’, which Abu Sa'd al-'Ala’ ibn 
Sahl worked out while reviewing the book of Ptolemy on Optics , and which 
he wanted to include in the body of his review of the fifth discourse in this 
book; al-Burhan 'ala anna al-falak laysa huwa JT ghayat al-saja\ istakhrajahu Abu 
Sa'd al-'Ala ’ ibn Sahl 'inda tasajjuhihi Kitab Batlamyus fi al-Manazir wa ardda an 

83 Cf Sezgin, GAS, vi, pp. 28-29. 

84 Al-Fihrist y ed. Fliigel, 1, p. 361, lines 9 and ri. 

85 See above, pp. xxxv-xxxvii. Theon of Alexandria, in his Commentary on the Almagest , gives 
an account of why objects in water look larger than they are, which he derived from a book 
(now lost) on Catoptrics by Archimedes. In its own terms and as a qualitative explanation the 
account is not incorrect: visual rays bend at the water surface towards the normal to reach the 
extremities of the immersed object, and this results in the object’s being seen through a larger 
angle than when seen directly, and, therefore, the object will appear larger than it is. In the same 
way an attempt is made to show that the deeper the object sinks the larger it looks. This is not 
different from what we find in Ahmad ibn 'Isa’s Optics and in I. H. ’s Commentary on the Almagest , 
and there are similarities between their figures and figures produced by Theon. Absent from the 
Archimedean account, however, is the strange assertion that the refracted ray (in water) lies 
along the extension of the ray reflected from the surface. One suspects, nevertheless, that the 
Arabic accounts might have owed their existence to some garbled version of the Theonian 
passage. See A. Rome, ‘Notes sur les passages des Catopriques d’Archimede conserves par 
Theon d’Alexandrie’, in Annales de la Societe Scientifique de Bruxelles , serie A, 52 (1932), 
pp. 30-41. See also Sabra, ‘Psychology versus Mathematics’, pp. 219-21. 

86 Above, pp. lii-liii. 


lx 


Introduction 


III. Aim and scope of the Optics 


lxi 


udamminahu jumlat al-tasaffuh li-Umaqala al-khamisa min hadha al-kitab . 87 It is 
implied that Abu Sa e d at least intended to write a ‘review’ of Book V of 
Ptolemy’s work. But only the ‘proof’ in question has been preserved. As was 
noted earlier, the ‘proof’ (?or the work of which it formed part) was known to 
I. H. who gave an exposition of it in his Discourse on Light. From the above 
observations it would appear that no one had made much profitable use of 
Ptolemy’s Optics until the first half of the eleventh century when I. H. carried 
out a careful examination of it that finally led him to produce the work that 
superseded it . 88 

It is clear beyond doubt that I. H.’s Optics took its starting point from the 
work written nine hundred years earlier by Ptolemy. This was fortunate, for, 
as far as is known, Ptolemy’s Optics was the most complete mathematical and 
experimental study of vision ever to have been produced before I. H.’s time; 
and by basing his own investigation on it I. H. was continuing the best 
approach to the subject that had been provided by Greek science. It is 
immediately noticeable that, although I. H. had unambiguously abandoned 
the visual-ray hypothesis, his book clearly conforms to the Ptolemaic tripar- 
tite division of ‘optics’ according to the three modes of vision. Thus the seven 
Books of I. H.’s Optics fall into three main parts dealing, respectively, with 
problems of rectilinear vision (Books I— III) and of vision by reflection 
(Books IV-VI) and refraction (Book VII). A treatment of the rainbow would 
not have been out of place in this scheme, since the phenomenon was 
understood (by the ancients and by I. H.) as a reflection phenomenon which 
depended on the position of the observer. But here also the power of tradition 
asserted itself: rainbow phenomena had generally been dealt with since 

87 The title is quoted from the Leningrad MS Or. Inst. 89 (= B 1030) where the correct pages 
taken up by Abu Sa'd’s treatise are i32a-b, 4.8a-b and 49a-b, in this order. 

88 Towards the middle of the eleventh century Ptolemy’s Optics was known to the Egyptian 
physician Abu al-Hasan 'All ibn Ridwan (d. 1068) who compared its style and the quality of 
mind displayed in it with Ptolemy's Tetrabiblos in an argument supporting (not against) the 
authenticity of the latter work. (I have consulted Ibn Ridwan’s commentary on the Tetrabiblos 
(Kitab al-Arba f maqaldt) in the Princeton University MS Yahuda 3517, fol. 2b; cf. M. Steinsch- 
neider, ‘Schriften der Araber in hebraischen Handschriften’, in Zeitschriji der Deutschen 
Xtorgenlandischen Gesellschajt , 47 (1983), p. 381, cited by Lejeune in L ’Optique de Claude Ptolemee, 
Introduction, p. 29*.) About the same time Sa'id ai-Andalusi (d. a.d. 1070) included the Optics 
in a list of Ptolemy’s writings ( Tabaqat al-umam , p. 29), in contrast to the tenth-century Fihrist of 
Ibn al-Nadlm which had ignored it. After the eleventh century Ptolemy's Optics seems to 
disappear from the field of medieval Arabic scholarship. The single known exception is the 
remark attributed to Joseph benjudah in the thirteenth century, in which hejudged the Optics of 
l. H. to be superior to the works of Euclid and ‘King Ptolemy’ (cf. M. Steinschneider, Die 
hebraischen Ubersetzungen des Mittelalters und die Juden als Dolmetscher , Berlin, 1893, p. 558; see 
above, n. 4). We know, however, that manuscripts of Ptolemy’s work were still in existence in 
the twelfth century: two such manuscripts were available to Admiral Eugenius in Sicily, one of 
which served him as the basis of his Latin translation (Lejeune, V Optique de Claude Ptolemee , 
Introduction, pp. 28*~30*). 


Aristotle in works on meteorology rather than in works on optics . 89 Again, in 
regard to the arrangement of their materials, the two works by I. H. and 
Ptolemy exhibit a rather conspicuous similarity. Book I in l. H.’s Optics , in 
particular the first three chapters in it, can be said to fill a gap created by the loss 
of Ptolemy’s Book 1 in which, as it has been convincingly argued , 90 the Greek 
mathematician had offered a theory of luminous, as distinguished from visual, 
radiation. That this gap was apt to suggest a problem to I. H. is shown by the 
fact that he had earlier attempted a reconstruction of the lost Book. Ptolemy’s 
Book n (on objects of vision and visual illusions) deals with topics which 
occupy the latter parts of I. H.’s Book I and the whole of his Books II and III. 
Ptolemy’s Books hi and iv (on theory of reflection and specular images) are 
paralleled by I. H.’s Books IV, V and VI. Finally, Ptolemy’s Book v discusses 
refraction phenomena which are the subject of I. H. ’s Book VII. There are also 
obvious similarities of content: many of I. H.’s observations, arguments and 
experiments are extensions or elaborations of their counterparts in Ptolemy’s 
Optics. And yet it is equally clear that the eleventh-century Arabic work went 
far beyond its Greek predecessor. As a result of its complete break with the 
visual-ray theory, and owing to its constant adherence to empiricism and 
continual resort to experiments, its great wealth of details which are system- 
atically arranged to serve clearly conceived arguments, and its skilful use of 
mathematics in the treatment of problems hitherto unsolved or unexplored, 
the Optics of I. H. undoubtedly marked a decisive progress beyond the stage 
already achieved in Ptolemy’s book. If the book of I. H. came to replace 
Ptolemy’s work in the Middle Ages and up to the time of Kepler as the most 
advanced and most complete work in its field, this was not due to historical 
accident but the result of correct judgement informed by examination and 
comparison of the two works. 

To say, as I have said above, that the Optics is chiefly concerned with vision 
need not obscure the fact that it is also a book on light; indeed, the leading idea 
of the book is that a viable and mature theory of vision must be based on a 
correct understanding of the behaviour of light. In accordance with this idea, a 
detailed experimental examination of the rectilinear propagation of light 
precedes exposition of the new theory of vision; and similar examinations of 
the behaviour of light rays in reflection and refraction lay the foundation for the 
subsequent investigations of images and illusions arising in non-rectilinear 
vision. We should also bear in mind the fact that the Optics (or certain parts of 

89 The influence of this tradition was still to be felt in the seventeenth century: Descartes 
offered his rainbow theory, not in his Dioptrique , but in a work entitled Meteores. 

90 Cf Albert Lejeune, Euclide et Ptolemee: Deux stades de V optique geometrique grecque, Louvain, 
1948. In part 1 of this book Lejune proposes a well-argued reconstruction of the lost Book 1 of 
Ptolemy’s Optics. 


ixii Introduction 

it), is topically continuous with other works ofl. H. which are concerned with 
properties of light rather than with their effect on sight. Thus, to give one or 
two examples, the treatise On the Quality of Shadows presupposes properties 
established in Book I of the Optics ; the treatise On the Form of the Eclipse applies 
a principle demonstrated in the same Book (namely the principle that from 
every point on a shining object light emanates in straight lines in all direc- 
tions); and the various treatises on burning mirrors and the burning sphere 
make use of rules of reflection and refraction which are set out in detail in 
Books V and VII. All these works, though not concerned with problems 
essentially requiring the presence of an eye, and regardless of their dates of 
composition, may be considered as extensions or applications of doctrines 
expounded in the Optics. 

The fact remains, however, that the specific subjects dealt with in those 
separate treatises were all excluded from the Optics , and it was not until Kamal 
al-Din al-Fansi composed his commentary on that book, the Tanqth 
al-Mandzir , that most of these subjects were brought together in a single work 
with the word manazir in its title. This was, on Kamal al-DTn’s part, a 
deliberate effort dictated by what he consciously conceived to be the scope ot 
the science of manazir or optics. He wrote in the Tanqth: 

Since the practitioner of this science [of optics] investigates lights with respect to 

how they come to cause visual perception, it is incumbent upon him to explain the 

notions of light, shadow, darkness, transparency, opacity and the ray, which are 

employed in [that science]; it behoves him also to expand his inquiry to cover some 

of the consequences attending the extension of certain lights (e.g. their extension > 

through apertures to opposite surfaces), namely the properties of these lights in 

respect of strength and weakness and shape. [He should] also [inquire] into shadows ( 

(which are like opposites to lights) and into their properties. We have therefore 

decided to go into these matters as a way of completing the subject and as a means of 

furnishing what is necessary and fitting to it . 91 

i 

These words were meant to justify the addition (in the form of an Appendix) 
of a recension of three of I. H.’s treatises, namely those On the Quality of 
Shadows , On the Form of the Eclipse and On Light. In a Sequel immediately 
preceding the Appendix, Kamal al-DTn goes into a lengthy discussion of the 
halo and the rainbow ‘as a subject essentially belonging to optics’ ( li-kawnihi 
haqiqan bi-dhalik ). 92 This discussion in turn leads him in the same Sequel to 
examine I. H.’s treatise On the burning Sphere with the purpose of deriving 
rules governing the use of the transparent sphere as a medium for viewing 
objects. These excursions into subjects not included in I. H.’s Optics still leave 

91 Tanqth , II, p. 357. 

92 Tanqth, 11. p. 258. 


III. Aim and scope of the Optics lxiii 

out all considerations of burning mirrors; and this was no doubt dictated by the 
still limited scope of optical inquiry as defined by Kamal al-Din in the quoted 
passage. But we are here no longer confined within the bounds of optics as 
strictly observed in I. H.’s book, and the exclusion of burning mirrors now 
begins to appear somewhat arbitrary: the presence of a viewing eye is no more 
an essential element in a problem concerned with the properties of burning 
mirrors than it is in a problem concerned with the distribution of light in 
shadows or with the projection of images on the screen of a pinhole camera . 93 

93 In the ninth century, Ahmad ibn ? Isa had already produced a book in which he treated jointly 
of vision and burning mirrors (above, n. 39). But the awkward title of the book (On Optics and 
on burning Mirrors according to Euclid's Doctrine concerning the Causes of Vision) clearly indicates that 
the author was deliberately combining two distinct subjects. Indeed, it is explicitly stated that 
the book is concerned with three species of light: solar, visual and igneous (nari). However, in 
contrast to Kamal al-Din, who feels compelled to give reasons to justify the addition of such 
subjects as shadow and the rainbow to those treated in I. H.’s Optics , Ahmad simply moves 
from one subject to another with no discernible logic or order. The eclectic character of his 
book can best be conveyed by the following synopsis of its topics, given in the order in which 
they occur in Ahmad s text. (The references in parentheses are to pages in the Laleli MS 2759 
(2), the title-page being numbered 21a): (1) A general doctrine of vision attributed to ‘the 
philosophers' and in particular to Euclid: a luminous power ( quwwa uuriyya) issuing from the 
eye produces in the illuminated atmosphere (al-hawa' al-mudf) a luminous cone which then acts 
as an organ of vision. The cone, of which the apex (ntustahadd, zttjj) lies at the eye or pupil 
(al-thizir) and the base at the object seen, is variously described as al-shu W al-miri (the luminous 
rav), al-nur al-shu Ti (radial light), al-sanawbara al-shuWiyya (the radial cone) or simply al-shiVa' 
(the ray). ShuW also refers sometimes in the text to line rays within the cone, and it applies to 
both rays of vision and rays emanating from self-luminous objects ( al-ajram dhawdt al-anwdr , 
and al-ajram al-hddith ( anhd al-shu'd f ), such as the stars and fire (26a-27a). (2) Description ot the 
shape of the eye and of the manner in which ‘the rav’ proceeds from various points on its 
outward surface (273-3 3 b). (3) A discussion of the reflection of rays from smooth surfaces 
(mirrors, water), with references to Euclid’s Optics and Anthemius’ Book on the Reflection of the 
Ray from Burning Mirrors. This leads to a rather extended though not very impressive treatment 
of image formation in mirrors and of mirrors as instruments of combustion. Also included is an 
account of ‘how the ray is reflected (yan akis) from a glass sphere’ ( al-billawra ), in fact an 
‘explanation’ of how solar rays are brought together alter internal reflection, but without 
refraction upon entering and leaving the sphere! The equality ot angles in reflection is implied 
throughout, but the images are said to be seen at the points of reflection on the smooth surface 
(33b-72a). (4) Refraction is then dealt with in the erroneous manner referred to earlier 
(pp. xxxvi-xxxvii, and n. 39), with a view to answering the question why the sun and moon 
appear larger at the horizon than in the middle of the sky. (5) A discussion of the halo, rainbow 
and rods follows, with reference to Aristotle (74b-89a). (6) Ahmad then returns to the 
subject-matter of Euclid’s Optics, to which he devotes the remainder of his book (89a-i4ob). 
(7) The book ends with a brief account of double vision and vertigo in terms of changes of 
position of the eyes and the effect of intoxicating materials on the luminous spirit (al-ruh al-nurt) 
in the brain ( 1 40b- 1 46b) . (8) Finally there follows a description of the construction and diseases 
of the eye attributed to Hippocrates, Galen ‘and others’ (i47a-i5ib). 

Ahmad’s book does not represent an advance on Greek discussions, but its early date and the 
variety of materials it contains would make it an interesting document worthy of detailed 
study. As is noted below (pp. lxv ff.), it was in use as late as the end of the thirteenth cehcury, 
serving Salah al-DTn al-Kahhal as the main source on the mathematical science of optics. 


lxiv 


Introduction 


lxv 


IV 

THE TANQIH AL-MANAZIR 
OF KAMAL AL-DfN AL-FARISI 

It is remarkable, and rather puzzling, that no mention of Kitdb al-Manazir has 
so far been found in the writings of Islamic mathematicians and philosophers 
of the eleventh and twelfth centuries. Nor is there evidence of any consequent 
impact of its teachings during that period, with one possible exception that 
relates to the mathematical part of the book. 94 On the contrary, references to 
I. H. by authors who lived in those two centuries strongly suggest that the 
book was not known to them. For example, the historian $a'id al-Andalusi 
(d. a. d. 1070), in a very brief notice in his Tabaqat al-umam , singles out for 
mention I. H.’s ‘compositions on burning mirrors’, a subject not treated in 
Kitdb al-Manazir . 95 Averroes (d. a.d. 1198), in his ‘Middle Commentary , 
(. Expositio media) of Aristotle’s Meteorology , cites a ‘renowned treatise’ ( tractatus 
famosus) by I. H. (here called ‘Avenetan’), and briefly summarizes and cri- 
ticizes some of its ideas. 96 The context of his discussion, and the use of 
‘ tractatus (maqala, qawl , risala) as opposed to ‘ liber (kitdb) , make it more than 
likely that Averroes was referring to I. H.’s treatise ‘On the Rainbow and the 
Halo’ ( Maqala Jt Qau/s Qu%ah wa al-hdla ), and not to the ‘Book of Optics’ 

94 In a book entitled al- Istikmdl , an advanced textbook of geometry composed by al-Mu’taman 
ibn Hud, King of Saragossa from 1081 to 1085, there is an account of the ‘lemmas’ proposed by 
I. H. for solving ‘Alhazen’s problem’ in Book V of the Optics. (This has been noted by Jan P. 
Hogendijk, who identified the book in several anonymous and incomplete manuscripts — see 
his ‘Discovery of an eleventh-century geometrical Compilation: the Istikmdl of Yusuf ibn Hud, 
King of Saragossa’, Historia Mathematical 13 (1986), pp. 43-52; also A. Djebbar, Deux mathe- 
maticiens peu connus de VEspagne du Xle siecle: al-Mu’taman et Ibti Sayyid , Universite Paris-Sud, 
Departement de Mathematique, 1984; on I. H.’s lemmas, see A. I. Sabra, ‘Ibn al-Haytham’s 
Lemmas for solving “Alhazen’s problem’”. Archive for History of Exact Sciences , 26 (1982), 
pp. 299-324). Assuming that the Latin translation of the Optics was made in Spain (rather than 
in Sicily), which is very likely (see below, n. 125), the book must have made its way into the 
Iberian peninsula some time before the early thirteenth century. But if the Andalusian 
scholar-king was directly acquainted with Kitdb al-Manazir itself (the extant parts of the Istikmdl 
do not mention I. H.’s name or the title of his book), then it follows that I. H.’s Optics was 
already in Spain in I. H.’s own century. This may be surprising for a book that was not widely 
appreciated in the Eastern part of the Muslim world, to which I. H. belonged, until much later 
— surprising because it is contrary to the general impression that Muslim Spain usually lagged 
behind the East in intellectual matters. It remains true, however, that Ibn Hud is the only Arabic 
author to whom we can point as one who made use of Kitdb al-Mandzir before the end of the 
thirteenth century. Ibn Hud also appears to have written a book on Optics in which he may have 
utilized I.H.’s work, but neither the content nor the fate of this book is known; see 
M. Giidemann, Das jiidische Unterrichtswesen wahrend der spanisch-arabischen Periode , Vienna, 
1873, PP* 86-89; al-Maqqari, Nafh al-tib, ed. Dozy etal., 1, p. 288. 

95 Tabaqat al-umam, p. 60. 

96 Cf Aristotelis Opera cum Averrois Commentariis, Venice, 1562; repr. Frankfurt-am-Main, 
1962, vol. v, fol. 45I V E. 


IV. KamAl al-DIn 

( Kitdb al-Manazir) (see below, p. 6). It seems that up to the end of the 
thirteenth century I. H. was known in the Islamic world primarily as a 
mathematician and a writer on astronomy. For example, al-Bayhaqi 
(d. a.d. 1 169—70) called him ‘the second Ptolemy’, where ‘Ptolemy’ undoubt- 
edly stood for the author of the widely known Almagest rather than the author 
of the far less known Optics . 97 'Umar al-Khayyami (d. c. A.D. 1130) was 
acquainted with one of I.H.’s writings on the problem of representing 
planetary motions in latitude by means of solid spheres; 98 and he also knew a 
commentary by I. H. on Book 1 of Euclid’s Elements 99 This shows that I. H.’s 
writings had already penetrated western Asia towards the end of the eleventh 
century or in the beginning of the twelfth. But Na$ir al-Din al-Tusi 
(d. a.d. 1274), the head of an important scientific institution at Maragha in 
Adharbayjan where he led a group of mathematicians assembled from various 
parts of the Islamic world, certainly had no knowledge of I. H.’s (or Ptole- 
my’s) Optics , 100 even though he was familiar with some of I. H.’s works on 
mathematics and astronomy. 101 

The extensive ophthalmological literature in Arabic provides us with 
further evidence for the general lack of knowledge of I. H.’s Optics in the 
Islamic world during the two hundred and fifty years following I. H.’s death. 
The Optics devotes three chapters in Book I to a treatment of the anatomy and 
structure of the eye and the physiology of vision, in which l. H. rearranges 
materials obtained from medical authorities to suit his new theory of vision. 
One would have expected his novel treatment of the subject to attract the 
attention of subsequent writers on these matters. But the contrary is the case; 
surveys of Arabic writings on ophthalmology have revealed that, up to the 
end of the thirteenth century, they show no awareness of I. H. ’s book or of his 

97 Tatimma , p. 77. Elsewhere in the same work (p. 25) al-Bayhaqi asserts that all he learnt of the 
science of optics he had derived from a book by al-Kindl which he considered ‘out of the 
ordinary’ in its field ( nadir fi dhdlik al-fann) — a clear indication that he was not acquainted with 
I. H.’s Kitdb al-Manazir. It is likely that he was referring to al-Kindi’s work now known to us 
only in Gerard of Cremona’s translation as De aspectibus. 

98 This we learn from Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi, who tells us in his Nihayat al-idrak that he was 
acquainted with a copy of I. H.’s Risala fi Harakdt [sic] al-iltijaf (III 61) to which 'Umar 
al-Khayyami had appended a chapter concerned with the problems treated in it (MS Ahmet 
III 3333, fol. 94b, lines 18-19). I* H.’s Risala (or Maqala) is not extant, but we have his reply 
(III 63: Maqala fi Hall shukuk harakat al-iltijdf) to objections raised against it by an unnamed 
mathematician. A critical edition of this reply has been published by A. I. Sabra in Journal for the 
History of Arabic Science, 3 (1979) — see Bibliography under Ibn al-Haytham. 

99 See his Risala fi Shark md ashkala min musadardt Kitab Uqltdis , ed. A. I. Sabra, Alexandria, 
1961, p. 6. 

100 See below, p. Ixxi and n. 112. 

101 Cf al-TusI’s al-Risala al-shdfiya 'an al-shakk fi al-khutut al-mutawdziya ~ Risala 8 in Majmu 
Rasa’il al-Tusi, Hyderabad Dn., a.h. 1309, 11, pp. 5-7; and al-Tusi’s Tadhkira, Leiden MS Or. 
905, fols 49a, 50a. 



Jxvi Introduction 

views. 102 A particularly significant example is the ophthalmological work 
composed about 1296 by $alah al-Drn al-Kahhal of Hamat (in Syria) and 
entitled Nur al- e uyun wa jamT al-junun (‘Light of the Eyes’). 103 This book is a 
compilation of statements from a very large number of Greek and, especially, 
Arabic writers on the eye, which are excerpted, paraphrased or quoted 
verbatim on every page. Here is a list of just a few of Salah al-Din’s Arabic 
sources, to give an idea of their scope: "All ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari (his 
Firdaws , completed in 850); Yuhanna ibn Masawayh (d. 857); Hunayn ibn 
Ishaq (d. 873 or 877) ( The Book of the Ten Treatises on the Eye)\ Thabit ibn 
Qurra (d. 901) (his Kitab al-Basar wa al-ba$lra , apparently a compilation made 
after the time of al-Razi); Abu Bakr al-Razi (d. 923) (his Kitab al-HawT); 'All 
ibn al-' Abbas (d. c. 982) (his Kitab al-Malaki)’, Ibn al-Jazzar (d. 1004); 
al-Zahrawi (d. 1009) (his Kitab al-Ta$rif ); 'All ibn 'Isa al-Kahhal (d. 1010) 
(Kitab al-T adhkira)', 'Ammar al-Maw$ili (a contemporary of 'All ibn 'Isa) (his 
Kitab al-Muntakhab li-kuhl al-'ayn)\ Ibn Sina (d. 1037) (his al-Qanun, al-Shijd\ 
e Uyun al-hikma ); Ibn Butlan (fl. 1049); Ibn Zuhr (d. 1161-62) (his Kitab 
al-Taysir); Musa ibn Maymun (d. 1204). 

It is seen, even from this partial list, that $alah al-DTn had access to authors 
who ranged chronologically from the ninth to the end of the twelfth century 
and geographically from Spain to central Asia. And yet there is no mention of 
I. H. or of his Kitab al-Manazirl 

The evidence implied by $alah al-Dln’s compilation is not simply evidence 
from silence. The second Maqala of his Nur al-'uyun, in five chapters, is given 
over to ‘the subject of sight and the views of philosophers regarding the 
manner of perceiving visible objects’. 104 After a brief and predictably per- 
plexing account of ‘the three’ ancient doctrines of vision (partly derived from 


102 J. Hirschberg, Geschichte der Augenheilkunde bei den Arabern = Graefe-Saemisch, Handbuch 
der gesamten Augenheilkunde , 2nded., vol. 13, Bk 2, Leipzig, 1908, pp. 161-68; M. Schramm, 
‘Zur Geschichte der physiologischen Optik in der arabischen Literatur’, in Sudhojfs Archiv fur 
Geschichte der Medizin und der Naturwissenschafien, 43 (1959), pp. 289-316; M. Ullmann, Die 
Medizin im Islam , Leiden, 1970, p. 210. 

103 I have consulted the Paris MS Bibliotheque Nationale, arabe 3008, 178 fols, dated 
Jumada I, a.h. 1126/A.D. 1714. A German translation is in J. Hirschberg, J. Lippert and 
E. Mittwoch, Die arabischen Augendrzte , pt. 2, Leipzig, 1905. On Salah al-DTn see also 
Hirschberg, Lippert and Mittwoch, Die arabischen Lehrbiicher der Augenheilkunde , Abhand- 
lungen der Koniglich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Philosophische-historische 
KI., 1905. Anhang 1, pp. 85-91. 

104 MS Bibl. Nat., ar. 3008. fols i5a-23b. 


IV. Kamal al-Din lxvii 

Aetius), 105 Salah al-Din goes on to report a ‘mathematical’ doctrine which he 
ascribes to ‘Euclid and other writers on optics’. The report in fact consists of a 
number of propositions which he lifts bodily from the ninth-century book of 
Ahmad ibn 'Isa On Optics and on burning Mirrors according to Euclid's Doctrine 
concerning the Causes of Vision. 106 The remainder of the Maqala then consists of 
reports derived from Book 111 of Avicenna’s De anima and his e Uyun al-hikma, 
Aristotle’s Politics, Hunayn’s Kitab al-'Ayn, Kitab Imtihan al-kahhalin of Ibn 
A'yan al-Ba$ri (d. a.d. 995) 107 and Kitab TabVat al-insan (De natura hominis), 
here attributed to Gregory (of Nyssa) but in fact the work of Nemesius of 
Emesa (fourth century). Would Salah al-Din have left I. H.’s Optics out of 
these accounts had the book been known to him? And would he have chosen 
to limit his presentation of the mathematicians’ doctrine of vision to the 
glaringly inferior book of Ahmad ibn 'Isa? 

It is difficult to escape the very strong impression that Kitab al-Manazir 
remained generally unknown and unused in the Islamic world until it was 
rescued from near oblivion when Kamal al-Din Abu al-Hasan al-Farisi 
(d. c. a.d. 1320) began to compose a large commentary on it near the end of the 
thirteenth century. For evidence of knowledge of the book’s existence 
(though not necesssarily of its contents) earlier in the same century we can 


! 105 According to Salah al-DTn, the three doctrines are those of (1) ‘mathematicians’, who 

assumed that rays proceed from the eyes; (2) those (?physicians, ?followers of Galen) who 
1 maintained that vision takes place by means of transforming the external air; and (3) ‘physi- 

cists’, who held the doctrine of impressions ( al-qa’ilun bi-al-intiba f ). Among the proponents of 
the first (sic) doctrine Salah al-DTn mentions Democritus and Epicurus (in fact members of the 
third group), who maintained that visual power consists in images (khayalat) which, having 
been formed in the visual ray (al-shu'a r al-basart), ‘return’ ( tarji ') to the eye. The views of the 
following philosophers are then described without an attempt to classify them under the 
preceding heads. Empedocles (Duqlis) was of the opinion that the visual ray mingles with the 
images ( amthila = eidola) formed in it — the ray thus produced from this combination being 
! known as al-shud e dhu tamathil ( aktines eiddlou). Hipparchus maintained that the visual ray goes 

j out of the eye like a hand stretching to touch the external objects, then conveys what it touches 

to the visual power — a view which Galen ‘proved with geometrical demonstrations’ in his De 
usu partium. Plato held that vision results from the mingling (ijtimd*) of the light (nur) from the 
eyes with the light ( daw ’) in the air, and this is called ‘the mingling of Platonic light’ ( ijtimd ' 
al-diyd * al-afldtuni: Platonike synaugeia). Euclid in his Optics said that a luminous power ( quwwa 
nuriyya) issues forth from the pupil of the eye in the shape of a cone the base of which must 
fall on the object seen. MS Bibl. Nat., ar. 3008, fols isa-b; see H. Daiber, Aetius Arabus, 
pp. 202-03. 

106 Salah al-DTn does not identify his optical source in this part of the book. Later, however, he 
quotes a passage from Ahmad ibn 'Isa’s Kitab al-Mandzir y this time naming both author arid title 
(MS Bibl. Nat., ar. 3008, fols 132b, line 22-fol. 134a, line 16). See above, nn. 39 and 93. 

' 107 Sezgin, GA 5 , in, p. 310. 


lxviii Introduction 

only point to its inclusion in bibliographies such as those of Ibn al-Qifti and 
Ibn Abi Usaybi'a and the brief reference to it by Joseph ben Judah. 108 

Kamal al-DIn wrote the Tanqih al-Mandzir li-dhawi al-absdr wa al-basa’ir (as 
he titled his critical commentary in the mannered style of his time) on the 
advice of his teacher, the well-known astronomer and philosopher Qutb 


108 See above, n. 88. An entirely different situation existed after the end of the thirteenth 
century. I. H. came to be recognized not just as a writer on certain aspects of optics but as the 
most important author on the subject. Thus Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Sa'id al-Ansari 
al-Akfanl (d. 749/1348), in his catalogue of the sciences entitled Irshad al-qasid ild asnd al-maqdsid 
(Cairo, 1900, p. 80) characterized “Kitab Ibn al-Haytham’ as an extensive book ( mabsiiv, the 
Cairo edition mistakenly has mutawassita ) on optics, as distinguished from Euclid’s short book 
( mukhtasar ) and 'All ibn 'Isa al-WazIr’s intermediate book ( mutawassit ). And Ibn Khaldun 
(d. 1406) described I. H. as ‘the most famous Muslim author on optics’ (without, however, 
mentioning Kitab al-Mandzir) (cf. The Muqaddimah , trans. F. Rosenthal, in [Princeton, N.J., 
1967], p. 133 ). 

As we have seen (n. 30 above), the bio-bibliographer Salih al-Din al-Safadi (d. 1363), 
reported that he had seen an ‘old copy’ of Kitab al-Mandzir , in seven volumes, in Egypt. 
Al-Safadi does not, however, say that he read any part of the book and does not seem to have 
done so; his account of visual illusions in al-Ghayth al-musjam (ed. cit., I, pp. 84-85, 86-87) 
reveals no knowledge of I. H.’s elaborate treatment of the subject in Bk III of the Optics. 

The foregoing observations accord well with the fact that all extant manuscripts of Kitab 
al-Mandzir , apart from the copy made in the eleventh century by the author’s relative, have 
come from a period between the thirteenth and the sixteenth century; and all of these, with the 
possible exception of the fourteenth-century Kopriilii MS, have been transcribed directly from 
that same eleventh-century copy (see below, section VI). 

It is conceivable that the vizier 'All ibn 'Isa (al-Jarrah), who served under the 'Abbasid caliph 
al-Muqtadir (r. A.D. 908—932) and died in 946, should have been the author of a ‘middle-size’ 
treatise on optics, as reported by al-Akfam. But the treatise is not known to have survived and 
does not seem to be attested elsewhere. Cf. the article by H. Bowen on 'All ibn 'Isa in 
Encyclopaedia of Islam, new edn, 1, pp. 386-88. It is also possible (though without supporting 
evidence in the literature) that al-Akfam may have confused the famous vizier with another 
person with the same name. Two possible candidates come to mind: one is 'All ibn 'Isa 
al-Asturlabl al-Hasib, author of several extant works on astronomical and astrological subjects 
and mentioned by Ibn al-Nadim (see Sezgin, GAS , vi, pp. 143-44). The other is 'All ibn 'Isa 
al-Kahhai (d. a.d. 1010), author of the well-known book on ophthalmology, Tadhkirat al - 
kahhdlin. 

It may be of interest to mention in this connection that I. H., in his autobiographical note of 
1027 (see above, section I of this Introduction) quotes two verses which he attributes to ‘Abu 
al-Qasim ibn al-wazlr 'All ibn 'Isa . . . who was a philosopher’ (Ibn Abi Usaybi'a, Tabaqdt , u, 
p. 96). This Abu al-Qasim is the second son (named *Isa) of the 'Abbasid vizier, who was indeed 
reputed to have had a serious interest in the Greek sciences (see Bowen’s article cited above, 
p. 387B; also Joel Kraemer, Humanism in the Renaissance of Islam, Leiden, 1986, pp. 134—36, 
where references on 'All ibn 'Isa and his son Abu al-Qasim will be found). The verses attributed 
by I. H. to Abu al-Qasim have sometimes been ascribed (mistakenly, it appears) to 'Isa ibn 
Zur'a (d. a.d. 1008) or to Yahya ibn 'Adi (d. a.d. 974) — see Kraemer, op. cit., p. 106 and n. 9. 


IV. Kamal al-Din lxix 

al-Dln Mahmud ibn Mas'ud al-ShirazI (d. a.d. 1311). 109 When Kamal al-Din 
joined al-Shlrazi at Tabriz, probably shortly before 1290, the latter had no 
direct knowledge of the contents of I. H. ’s book. 110 As we are told by Kamal 

109 The little biographical information we have on Kamal al-DIn all derives from his own 
Tanqih al-Mandzir. The data provided in this work have been discussed in two important 
studies published in 1910 and 1958: E. Wiedemann, ‘Zu Ibn al Haitams Optik ’, Archiv Jiir die 
Geschichte der Naturwissenschafien und der Technik, 3 (1910), pp. 1-53; and M. Nazlf, ‘Kamal 
al-DIn al-Farisi wa ba'd buhuthuhu fi 'ilm al-daw”, in Publications of the Egyptian Society for the 
History of Science, no. 2 (Memorial Lectures on Ibn al-Haytham), Cairo, 1958, pp. 65-100. 
Kamal al-Din is believed to have begun working on the Tanqih shortly before 1290 and, 
according to Wiedemann, he completed it between 14 January 1302 (the date of a total lunar 
eclipse to which he may be referring in one of the Appendices to this book — cf Tanqih , II, 
p. 371) and 13 1 1 (the year in which Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi died). Nazlf considers it likely that 
the Tanqih itself (as distinguished from the Appendices) may have been completed before the 
eclipse in question. Nazif’s views on the relationship between Kamal al-DIn’s research on the 
rainbow and Shirazi’s account of the same phenomenon in his Nihayat al-idrdk (which views are 
at variance with those of Wiedemann) have been summarized by R. Rashed in his article on 
Kamal al-Din in Dictionary of Scientific Biography, vn (1973), pp. 212-19. 

The Tanqih has been published as Kitab Tanqih al-Mandzir li-dhawi al-absdr wa al-basa’ir, by 
Kamal al-Din Abu al-Hasan al-Farisi, 2 vols, Hyderabad, Dn., a.h. 1347-48/A. d. 1928-30. 
This edition was based on a transcription of two Rampur MSS (?MSS Raza Library 9267M and 
6444M) which was first compared (by Mawlawi 'Inayat Ahmad al-Naqwi) with a third 
(unspecified) Bankipore MS, and then checked against the Leiden MS Or. 201 by F. Krenkow 
(cf vol. 11, pp. 408-09). The edition is unfortunately riddled with printing and other errors both 
in the text and in the geometrical diagrams, and should therefore be used with caution. For MSS 
of the Tanqih, seen. 115 below. 

110 We know from his own testimony, and from evidence provided by his writings, that 
al-Shirazi had not read I. H.’s Optics before at least the end of 1284. The following is what 
al-Shirazi wrote in Maqdla 1, Bab iii, Fasl 2 of his Nihayat al-idrdk Ji dirdyat al-afidk , a large 
astronomical work which he completed in the middle of Sha'ban 680/November 1281: ‘Ibn 
al-Haytham said in one of his Notes (ft ba e d taliqatih) that the [apparent] enlargement of the stars 
at the horizons has a universal cause other than the [atmospheric] vapour, and owing to that 
cause the stars, and distances between them, are seen larger at the horizons that in the middleof 
the sky; and [that] if the vapour were the cause, then the stars should have appeared smaller at 
the horizons than in the middle of the sky; for the stars are in the heavens and the heavens are 
more subtle than air, and when a visible object is located in the more subtle body while the eye is 
located in the denser body, then the eye will see the object smaller than it is, and the denser the 
body that lies next to the eye the smaller the object will appear; but the air is denser at the 
horizons than in the middle of the sky; therefore the stars should have appeared smaller at the 
horizons than in the middle of the sky. [Ibn al-Haytham] said, “And I have shown this in my 
book on Optics (kitabi ft al-Mandzir) in my discussion of refraction, where I explained what this 
universal cause is’’. But this book has not come my way so that I might find out the truth or 
falsity of what he says. If someone wants to ascertain the matter let him read his book and form a 
judgement of what he can determine. For my part, if I gain possession of this book, I shall, by 
God’s will, look into it and attach to this book of mine what I find to be the truth in regard to this 
matter. God knows best the truths of things’. 

I have consulted MS Ahmet III 3333 (which includes Naslr al-DIn al-TusI’s Tadhkira as well 
as al-Shlrazi’s Nihaya), fol. 40b. The date of composition is stated in the colophon on p. 162a; 
the MS itself was copied by Muhammad ibn Muhammad, known as Sharaf al-Samarqandl, at 
Tuqat in a.d. 1338 (Sha'ban 738). The same date of composition is also stated in MS Kopriilii 
957 (completed on 20jumada I, 681/ 26 August 1282), fol. 194b; and in MS Kopriilu 956 



lxx 


Introduction 


IV. Kamalal-DIn 


lxxi 


al-DIn, his teacher could only remember that in his youth he had seen in one of 
the libraries in Fars ‘a book on optics in two large volumes attributed to Ibn 
al-Haytham’. 111 We gather that Kamal al-DIn had developed an interest in 
optics either before or soon after he joined al-Shirazi. He was puzzled by the 
statement, which he found in the writings of ‘some leading philosophers’ ( ba 'd 
a ’ immat al-hikma 'anghayri wahidin minhum ), that when light strikes the surface 
of water (for example) it passes through the water in the direction of incidence 
and is refracted along the extension of the reflected ray, thus giving rise to four 


111 Tanqih , i, pp. 4-9; esp. p. 6, lines 17-19. Note the implication that Kitdb al-Manazir was in 
Persia (Fars) in al-Shirazf s lifetime, although we are told later in the same account that the copy 
finally obtained by al-Shirazi came from a ‘distant land’ (?Egypt) — see n. r 14 below. 


(completed at the Sahibiyya-Shamsiyya School at SIwas in the beginning of a.h. 683/ 
a.d. 1284), fol. 148b. Both these manuscripts, it will be noted, were executed during the 
author’s lifetime, in fact only a short time after the Nihdya had been written. The copyist of MS 
Kopriilu 956 asserts (fol. 148b) that he completed checking the text against the author’s copy and 
with the author's help on 10 Shawwal 683/20 December 1284. 

The words quoted (or paraphrased) by al-Shirazi from I. H.’s ‘Notes’ occur almost exactly, 
but with some transpositions, in the first of the shukuk at the end of I. H.’s Hall shukiik Ji Kitdb 
al-Majisti . . . [Ill 38], MS Fatih 3439, fol. 148b; see above, n. 16. 

Al-Shirazi does not seem to have advanced in his knowledge of optics when, four years after 
writing the Nihdya, he completed his al-Tuhfaal-Shdhiyya in a.h. 684/ a.d. 1285. InBdbll, Fasl 2 
of the latter work he gives a careless and confusing account of why the stars appear larger near 
the horizon than at higher altitudes in terms of what he calls initdf and in e ikds : the reason, he 
says, is not that the stars are closer to us when seen on the horizon, but because the intervening 
vapour makes them seem larger; for we see objects in vaporous air by means of bent ( munatifa ) 
rays that issue from the eye and upon striking the vapour particles are reflected (tan f akis) (?to the 
eye), thus causing the visual angle to increase in size(?), which in turn makes the star behind the 
vapour look bigger — it being established in the science of optics that the apparent size of a 
visible object varies directly with the angle of vision. Since the vapour is wider along the 
horizontal than along the vertical direction, the ‘reflection’ at the horizon will be ‘farther’ from 
the axis of the visual cone than when the star is viewed at the middle of the sky, thus increasing 
the angle of vision (MS Bibliotheque Nationale, arabe 2516, fol. 5b; Mawsil MS, Jami' 
al-Basha, no. 287, copied in the Ptenth/sixteenth centuries, fols I2b-i3a). It would seem that 
al-Shirazi had not advanced beyond the retarded stage represented by Ahmad ibn 'Isa’s Optics 
and I. H.’s Commentary on the Almagest (see above, pp. xxxv fF.). His brief and unsatisfactory 
treatment of the problem prompted a reader of the Mawsil manuscript, who was acquainted 
with I. H.’s Kitdb al-Manazir , to explain in a marginal note what really happens when light 
passes from one medium into another (fols I2b-I3a-I3b). 

The colophon of the Bibliotheque Nationale MS, arabe 25 16, fol. 118a, copied in Rajab, 684, 
states that the Tuhfa was completed at SIwas towards the end ofjumada I, 684/ August 1285. 


equal angles made with the surface. 112 This account of refraction betrays 
ignorance not only of I. H.’s work, but also of Ptolemy’s Optics . Another 
problem which Kamal al-DIn found inadequately treated in books of astro- 
nomy was the question (posed in the Almagest) of why the stars appeared 
larger near the horizon than at higher altitudes. 113 It was in response to Kamal 
al-DIn’s admission of puzzlement over these matters that al-Shirazi made a 
successful effort to obtain a copy of I. H.’s book which he handed over to his 
eager student. 114 After Kamal al-DIn had examined the book (which greatl; 
impressed him) it was decided that he should write a commentary on it. 

The commentary was intended to be in part a summary ( ikhtisdr ) and 
elucidation of the Optics , in part an extension of its investigations and a 
revision of what was objectionable in it. To this was added a Conclusion 
(khatima) on refraction ‘which completed what had been stated in Book VII’ 
of the Optics ; a Sequel ( dhayl ) expounding Kamal al-DIn’s own theory of the 
rainbow and including a summary of I. H.’s treatise on the same subject; and 
three Appendices ( lawahiq ) providing summaries of three other treatises by 
I. H. — namely, III 36: On the Quality of Shadows ; III 80: On the Form of the 
Eclipse ; and III 60: Discourse on Light. The Tanqih is thus nothing less than an 

112 Tanqih , 1, p. 6, lines 4-9. Kamal al-DIn’s words (quoted above) clearly indicate that he 
found this curious account of refraction in the writings of several ‘leading philosophers’. That 
Nasir al-DIn al-Tusi was among those philosophers can be seen from his extant ‘Treatise on the 
Reflection and Refraction of Rays’ ( Risdla fi in f ikas al-shud e dt wa initafiha ); English translation 
by H.J.J. Winter and W. 'Arafat in ‘A Statement on optical Reflection and “Refraction” 
attributed to Nasir ud-DIn at-Tusi’, in Isis , 42 (1951), pp. 138-42; an earlier but incomplete 
German translation is E. Wiedemann’s ‘Ober die Reflexion und Umbiegung des Lichtes von 
Nasir al Din al Tusf , in Jahrbuch jiir Photographic, 21 (1907), pp. 38-44; for MSS of the Arabic 
text see M. Krause, ‘Stambuler Handschriften’, p. 498; Brockelmann, GAL, I 2 , p. 674, no. 38 
and Suppl. I, p. 930. In this work al-Tusi presents the equality of the four angles made with the 
surface by the rays of incidence, reflection, penetration (along the extension of the incident ray) 
and refraction (along the extension of the reflected ray) as a consequence of conceiving the ray of 
light as a solid cone of radiation that cannot be expanded or compressed: considerations of 
symmetry alone established the equality of the four angles! Compare the accounts of refraction 
in Ahmad ibn 'Isa’s Optics and in I. H.’s Commentary on the Almagest cited above, pp. xxxvff. 
and nn. 39 and 93. For the text of al-TusI’s Risdla I have consulted MS 2136(1) in the Central 
Library of Tehran University. 

113 Tanqih, 1, p. 6, lines 12-14. 

114 The text of the Hyderabad edition of the Tanqih states that the copy of Kitdb al-Manazir 
which al-Shirazi had finally obtained ‘from a distant land’ was in the author’s handwriting: l wa 
hasala al-kitdb bi-khatt Ibn al-Haytham min aqsd al-bildd' (1, p. 7, line 4). These words occur in the 
Bankipore MS no. 2455 (seventeenth century A.D.), as we learn from Maulavi Abdul Hamid, 
Catalogue of the Arabic and Persian Manuscripts in the Oriental Public Library at Bankipore , vol. xxn 
(Arabic MSS, Sciences), Bihar, Patna, 1937, p. 47; and the same words are also found in the 
Columbia University MS Plimpton Or. 301, fol. 3a, line 20. However, the phrase l bi-khatt Ibn 
al-Haytham ’ (in I. H.’s handwriting) does not exist in any of the following copies: Ahmet 
III 3340, fol. 2b, line 1; Ayasofya 2598, fol. 3a, line 7; Jerusalem, Khalidiyya, p. 7, line 3; 1 Leiden 
Or. 201, fol. 3 a, line 3. I have not been able to examine other copies of the Tanqih ; see following 
note. 


lxxii Introduction 

exposition and critical examination of a large section of I. H.’s important 
writings on the subject of light and vision. In spite of its large size (98 5 pages in 
the Hyderabad edition), many more manuscripts of it are extant today than of 
Kitab al-Manazir , 115 and it was undoubtedly through the Tanqih that I. H.’s 
major doctrines eventually came to be better known in the Islamic world. 116 

Throughout his commentary Kamal al-Din distinguished the statements 
which he derived from the Optics by introducing them with ‘he said’, while 
introducing his own comments with ‘1 say’. This has sometimes given the 
impression that he was quoting I. H.’s actual words where in fact he was 


115 There exist many more copies of the Tanqih than there are of Kitab al-Manazir. Those 
known to me to be extant are the following: 

1. Bankipore MS no. 2455, 280 fols, Pseventeenth century a.d. 

2. Bankipore MS no. 2456, 253 fols, eighteenth century a.d. 

(For these two MSS see Maulavi Abdul Hamid, Catalogue, vol. xxn, pp. 47-48). 

3. Istanbul MS Ahmet III 3340, 204 fols. Copied at Nishapur and dated Wednesday, 15 Sha- 
ban 716/ a.d. 1316. 

4. Istanbul MS Ayasofya 2598, 317 fols. Dated Thursday, 8 Dhu al-Hijja 1079/A. d. 1669 (see 
M. Krause, ‘Stambuler Handschriften’, p. 508.) 

5. Jaipur MS no. 17, 1, c. 150 fols, in the Library of the Maharaja Mansingh II Museum at 
Jaipur, India. Copied in a.h. 1070/A.D. 1659-60 and checked in a.h. 1079/A. d. 1668-69. (C/ 

D. A. King, 'A handlist of the Arabic and Persian astronomical Manuscripts in the Maharaja 

Mansingh II Library in Jaipur \ Journal for the History of Arabic Science, 4 [1980], p. 82.) ji 

6. Jerusalem MS (no. ?) in the Khalidiyya Library. (I have seen a photograph in the possession 
of Dr Tarif Khalidi, Beirut.) 

7. Kuibyshev Regional Library MS reported by B. A. Rozenfeld (loc. cit., note 25 above), 

fols 3 i v -27i r . No date mentioned. • 

8 . Leiden MS Or. 201, 318 fols. Undated. 

9. New York, Columbia University Library, Plimpton MS Or. 301. 310 fols. Undated. 

(Pseventeenth century a.d.) 

10. Rampur, Raza Library MS no. 9267M. Dated 1052/1642. Wanting the Sequel (Dhayl) and I 

the Appendices ( Lawahiq ). 

11. Rampur, Raza Library MS no. 6444M. Seventeenth century a.d. Contains only the text 
on pp. i-i9b, line 7 in the preceding MS. 

For the two Rampur MSS see Imtiyas e All ' Arshl, Catalogue of the Arabic Manuscripts in Raza * 

Library, Rampur. Vol. 5: Mathematics, medicine, natural science, agriculture, occult sciences, j 

ethics, politics, education and military science. Printed for Raza Library Trust, Rampur, U.P., 1 

India, 1975. Pp. 36-37. 

12. Tehran, MS Majlis-i Shura-i Milll no. 2451. 265 fols, dated 23 Rabf II, 1096/ a.d. 1685. 

The Hyderabad edition — see n. 109 above — made use of the two Rampur MSS, one of the 

two Bankipore MSS and the Leiden MS. 

116 It was, for example, from the Tanqih that Taqi al-DTn ibn MaYuf (d. 1585) gained 
knowledge of the contents of Kitab al-Mandzir, see his Kitab Nur hadaqat al-ibsdr wa nur hadiqat 
al-atizdr, Bodleian MS Marsh 119 (the author’s autograph, completed in a.h. 982/A. d. 1574- 
75), fol. 4a. The book was dedicated to Sultan Murad III who reigned between 982/1574 and 
1003/1595. 


V. Latin translation lxxiii 

summarizing or re-phrasing the text. (As an act of piety [ tabarrukan ], how- 
ever, he reproduced the Preface to the Optics verbatim). 117 Again with the aim 
of guiding the reader through the arguments of the book he divided its often 
long chapters into sections ( maqdsid) ‘as is customary in mathematical books’, 
and interspersed I. H.’s continuous prose with explanatory labels such as 
‘example’, ‘experiment’, ‘notice’, ‘resume’, or ‘conclusion’. As a result of 
these changes, especially the almost regular practice of paraphrasing I. H.’s 
text, it is clear that, for the purpose of editing the Optics , the Tanqih cannot 
claim the same authority as can be given to manuscripts of I. H.’s work itself. 
Thanks to the existence of a good copy of Books I— III of the Optics , I have not 
found it necessary to rely on Kamal al-Dln’s version for that part of the work. 
The situation is quite different, however, with regard to the remaining parts 
of the book. Manuscripts of Book V of Kitab al-Manazir, for example, are 
either incomplete or totally lack the figures for the many complex geometrical 
proofs which it contains. Here, therefore, the Tanqih can be of valuable help, 
provided that one makes use of the extant manuscripts and does not rely 
entirely on the faulty Hyderabad edition. 

V 

THE MEDIEVAL LATIN TRANSLATION OF THE OPTICS 
AND RISNER’S EDITION OF I 572 

While Qutb al-DIn al-Shlrazi was trying to obtain a copy of the long- 
neglected Kitab al-Manazir from a ‘distant land’, the book had already made a 
deep impression in Europe where, in a Latin translation known as Perspectiva 
or De aspectibus , it had become the principal source of information for the 
optical writings produced in the 1260s and 1270s by Roger Bacon, John 
Pecham, and Witelo. 118 Exactly when, where and by whom the translation 
was made are still unanswered questions. Gerard of Cremona (d. 1187), or his 
school, remains a possible source of the translation, but the ascription of the 
translation to him or to his associates has not been proved; the Perspectiva is not 
included in the list of his works drawn up by his pupils. 119 Some twenty 
manuscript copies of the Perspectiva (not all of them complete) are at present 

117 Tanqih , 1, pp. 11-15; esp. p. 11, line 13. 

118 Cf D. C. Lindberg’s Introduction to the 1972 reprint of Opticae thesaurus, cited below, 
n. 126. 

119 A list of 87 translations ascribed to Gerard is in George Sarton’s Introduction to the History of 
Science , n, pp. 339-44, with bibliography. The list covers the fields of logic, philosophy, 
mathematics, astronomy, physics, mechanics, medicine, astrology, alchemy and geomancy; it 
includes the De crepusculis et nubium ascensionibus which has been wrongly attributed to I. H.; see 
below. 


Ixxiv 


Introduction 


known to have been preserved. 120 The earliest copies are from the thirteenth 
century, and one of these, now at Edinburgh, is dated 1269. The earliest 
known citation from the Perspectiva occurs in a work, De triangulis , which 
Marshall Clagett once thought to have been written byjordanus de Nemore, 
who flourished between 1220 and the early 1230s. Clagett has since argued, 
convincingly, that the De triangulis was a later compilation made by another 
writer, perhaps in the middle of the thirteenth century. 121 Thus in the light of 
the evidence available it is at present generally assumed that the Optics of I. H. 
was rendered from the Arabic into Latin either in the late twelfth or, more 
likely perhaps, in the early thirteenth century. Mention should also be made of 
a single manuscript copy of an Italian translation made from the Latin in the 


120 Ot' the sixteen or so MSS that have the complete (or almost complete) Latin text of De 
aspectibus, I have consulted the following: 

1. Bruges, Bibliotheque Publique, MS 512, fols r— 1 r 3 v . Thirteenth century. 

2. Cambridge, Peterhouse MS 209 (= 1 1. 10.63), fols 1-1 1 i v - Fourteenth century. 

3. Cambridge, Trinity College MS 13 11 (=0.5.30), fols i-i6s r . Thirteenth century. 

4. Edinburgh, Royal Observatory, MS CR3.3 (= 9-1 1-3 (20)], fols 2 r -i86 r . Copied in 1269. 

5. Florence, Biblioteca Nazionale, MS Magliabechi XX. 52, fols 1— 1 36 v . Fifteenth century. 
Incomplete. 

6. London, British Library, Royal MS 12. G. VII, fols i-i02 v . Fourteenth century. 

7. London, British Library, Sloane MS 306, fols i-i77 v . Fourteenth century. 

8. London, Royal College of Physicians, MS 383, fols 1— 1 3 2 r . Thirteenth century. 
Incomplete. 

9. Oxford, Bodleian Library, MS Corpus Christi College, 150, folsi-ii2 r . Thirteenth 
century. 

10. Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale, MS lat. 7247. fols i-207 v . Fourteenth century. 

11. Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale, MS lat. 16199, fols i-277 v - Sixteenth century. 

12. Vatican City, Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, MS Pal. lat. 1355, fols 1-147L 

13. Vienna, Osterreichische Nationalbibliothek, MS 5322, fols 1-269'. Fifteenth century. 

A list of twenty MSS, including fragments and excerpts of De aspectibus , is in David C. 
Lindberg, A Catalogue of Medieval and Renaissance Optical Manuscripts, Toronto: Pontifical 
Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 1975, pp. 17-18. See also Graziella Federici Vescovini, Studisulla 
prospettiva medievale, Turin, 1965, pp. 93-94, n. 10. 

121 Cf Marshall Clagett, Archimedes in the Middle Ages , vol. 1: The Arabo-Latin Tradition , 
Madison, Wise., 1964, pp. 668-69 and 674; vol. v: Quasi- Archimedean Geometry in the Thirteenth 
Century, etc., Philadelphia, 1984, esp. pp. 297-301. See also Bruce Eastwood, ‘Alhazen, 
Leonardo, and late-medieval Speculation on the Inversion of Images in the Eye’, Annals of 
Science, 43 (1986), p. 422 and n. 32. 


V. Latin translation 


lxxv 


fourteenth century by Guerruccio di Cione Federighi, 122 the source of 
Lorenzo Ghiberti’s quotations from the Optics in his Commentarii . 123 

The choice of Perspectiva as a title paralleling the Arabic al-Manazir perhaps 
suggests a Spanish rather than a Sicilian origin for the translation. When 
Friedrich Risner published his edition of the Latin translation in 1572 he 
substituted the Greek optica for the Latin perspectiva or de aspectibus . Optika is of 
course the word which, as the title of two books by Euclid and Ptolemy, had 
originally been rendered by the Arabic al-manazir. It is therefore relevant to 
note that when the Latin translation of Ptolemy’s Optica was made from the 
Arabic in ‘many-tongued Sicily’ in the twelfth century, its author, Admiral 
Eugenius whose native tongue was Greek and who was acquainted with the 
Greek text of Euclid’s Optica , preferred the Greek optica to any Latin equiva- 
lent of the Arabic manazir. 124 It would seem that, had the Latin translation of 
I. H.’s Kitab al-Manazir been executed in Sicily, it too would have probably 
borne the title Optica . 125 

The volume published by Risner in 1 572 included two items in addition to 
I.H.’s Opticae libri septem : viz. a short treatise On Dawn and Twilight (De 
crepusculis) which had been wrongly attributed to I. H. at least from the time of 
Nicole Oresme; and Witelo’s Perspectiva , which in Risner’s volume is called 
Opticae libri decern. The whole collection was given the title Opticae the- 
saurus . 126 The treatise On Dawn and Twilight , originally composed in Arabic 

122 The unique copy of this Italian translation is MS Vat. Lat. 4595, fols i-i77 v , dated 1341. 
The text of the ‘Prospettiva' is followed in this MS by an Italian translation (also made by 
Guerruccio di Cione Federighi from the Latin) of the Liber de crepusculis (fols 1 I7 v -i8i v ) — see 
below. Cf Enrico Narducci, ‘Nota intorno ad una traduzione italiana, fatta nel secolo 
decimoquarto del trattato d’Ottica d’ Alhazen, matematico del secolo undecimo, e ad altri lavori 
di questo scienziato’, Bullettino di bibliografia e di storia delle scienze matematiche e fisiche , 4 (1871), 
pp. 1-48; idem, ‘Giunte alio scritto intitolato “Intorno ad una traduzione italiana, fatta nel 
secolo decimo quarto, del trattato d’Ottica d’ Alhazen” ’, loc. cit., pp. I37”39- 

123 Cf Graziella Federici Vescovini, ‘Contributo per la storia della fortuna di Alhazen in Italia: 
II volgarizzamento del MS Vat. 4595 e il “Commentario terzo” del Ghiberti’, in Rinascimento , 
series 2, vol. 5 (1965), pp. 17-49. 

124 On Eugenius see C. H. Haskins, Studies in the History of Mediaeval Science, New York, i960, 
pp. 171 fF. 

125 In MSS of the Perspectiva I. H.’s first name, al-Hasan, is usually transliterated ‘Alhacen’. It 
has been argued that the use of the letter ‘c’ with the value of a voiceless ‘s’ ‘strongly suggests’ a 
Spanish origin for the translation. See D. C. Lindberg, Theories of Vision from Al-Kindi to Kepler, 
Chicago, 1976, pp. 209-10. 

126 Opticae thesaurus. Alhazeni Arabis libri septem, nuneprimum editi. Eiusdem liber De crepusculis et 
Nubium ascensionibus. Item Vitellonis Thuringopoloni libri X. Omnes instaurati, figuris illustrati et 
aucti, adiectis etiam in Alhazenum commentarijs , a Federico Risnero, Basel, 1572. Reprinted, New 
York, 1972, with a historical introduction by D. C. Lindberg dealing in part with the 
transmission of I. H. ’s Optics to the West. It is unfortunate that I. H. ’s book has frequently been 
referred to by the title of this collective volume. ‘Thesaurus’ is not an appropriate title for a book 
not intended by its author to be a ‘storehouse’, ‘dictionary’ or ‘encyclopaedia’. 


lxxvi 


Introduction 


in the eleventh century by the Andalusian scholar Abu *Abd Allah 
Muhammad ibn Mu'adh, had been translated into Latin by Gerard of Cre- 
mona and is sometimes found appended in Latin MSS to I. H. ’s Perspectiva. 127 
It had previously been printed (with the mistaken attribution to I. H.) in 
1 542. 128 Witelo’s Perspectiva had been printed twice — at Nuremberg in 1535 
and 1551. In the 1572 edition, Risner was able to demonstrate the dependence 
of Witelo’s work on that of I. H. by providing numerous cross-references in 
each of them to the other. So close was this dependence that the same 
geometrical figures often fitted both texts. 

Risner tells us that for his edition of I.H.’s Optics he relied on two 
manuscripts. These have not been identified, but no significant discrepancies 
of substance have so far been noted between Risner’s text and the Latin 
manuscript tradition in general. Risner, however, introduced divisions of the 
chapters of the book into sections or propositions which he supplied with 
titles or enunciations — something like what the Persian Kamal al-DIn had 
done in his own edition of the Arabic text some three hundred years earlier. 

The question which concerns us here is: how does the Latin translation 
generally compare with the Arabic text? One important difference between 
the two was noted as early as 1910 by Eilhard Wiedemann, 129 though the 
significance of it has yet to be fully realized. This is the fact that the Latin 
translation, in all extant manuscripts and in Risner’s edition, lacks the first 
three chapters in Book I. The first of these chapters is a general preface (sadr) or 
introduction to the Optics as a whole, in which I. H. summarizes the views of 
ancient mathematicians and natural philosophers on the subject of vision, 
states his own view of the nature of optical inquiry, and explains the aim and 
method of his book. The second chapter sets out the conditions of vision. In 
the third I. H. conducts a detailed experimental inquiry into the properties of 
various kinds of light and the modes of their radiation, and it is here that he 
uses the term camera obscura ( al-bayt al-muzlitn) in the course of his examination 
of straight-line propagation and gives his geometrical demonstration of the 
mode of radiation of what he calls ‘accidental light’, that is light diffused by an 
opaque surface. In general, this third chapter expounds a doctrine of light and 

127 Cf A. I. Sabra, ‘The Authorship of the Liber de crepusculis , an eleventh-century Work on 
atmospheric Refraction’, /sis, 58 (1967), pp. 77-85 and p. 560. For MSS of De crepusculis , see 
D. C. Lindberg, Catalogue , pp. 16-17- Bernard Goldstein has published an English translation 
from the Hebrew version made in the fourteenth century by Samuel ben Judah of Marseilles, 
‘Ibn Mu'adh’s Treatise on Twilight and the Height of the Atmosphere’, Archive for History of 
Exact Sciences, 17(1977)* pp. 97-118. 

128 Petri Nonii Salaciensis De crepusculis liber unus, nunc recens et natus et editus. Item Allacen 
Arabis uetustissimi , de causis Crepusculorum Liber unus, a Gerardo Cremonensi iam olim Latinitate 
donatus, nunc uero omnium primum in lucem editus , Lisbon, 1542. 

129 E. Wiedemann, ‘Zu Ibn al-Haitams Optik’, p. 4. 


V. Latin translation 


lxxvii 


colour which serves as a physical basis for the theory of vision developed in the 
subsequent chapters of Book I. Without the first three chapters (especially the 
third) the Latin writers on optics were handed a truncated theory for which 
they had to provide a new foundation. The significance of this situation 
becomes even greater when we remember that Ptolemy’s Optics also reached 
the Latin West (through Eugenius’ translation from the Arabic) without a 
theory of light radiation which had already been missing when the Arabic 
version was made, probably in the ninth century. These two historical 
accidents constituted the occasion for the choice of the metaphysical doctrine 
of multiplication of species as a basis for optical theory in the Latin Middle 
Ages. The result of this choice was a hybrid theory combining heterogeneous 
elements that ill-suited one another, and the Latin medieval ‘synthesis’ was 
thus fated to bring about a serious weakening of the empirical logic rigorously 
adhered to in I. H.’s Optics. 

The seven Books of I. H.’s Optics are each divided in the Arabic MSS into 
chapters which are supplied with descriptive titles and with ordinal numbers 
written out in words. These divisions and their titles are reflected, albeit with a 
variable degree of accuracy, in the Latin manuscript tradition and in Risner’s 
edition. Book I comprised eight chapters in the original Arabic. Now the 
missing chapters from this Book may already have been lacking in the Arabic 
MS (or MSS) from which the Latin translation was made. Or, alternatively, 
they may have been once translated and then lost (together with the name of 
the translator?) soon thereafter. On either hypothesis one would expect to find 
in the Latin tradition a sign of awareness that something was missing from 
Book I, since the remaining chapters would have been numbered in the Arabic 
‘fourth’ to ‘eighth’. I have not, however, come across such a sign. What I have 
found, on the contrary, are attempts to divide the Latin text corresponding to 
Chapter 4 in the Arabic so as to obtain a total number of seven or eight 
chapters. This could have been done only on the assumption that the Latin 
contained the full text of Book I. Thus Risner divides Arabic Chapter 4 into 
three chapters, and his Chapters 4, 5, 6 and 7 correspond to Arabic Chapters 5, 
6, 7 and 8 respectively — as is set out in the following table: 

Book I 

Arabic Text Risner's Edition 

Chapter 1 
Chapter 2 
Chapter 3 
Chapter 4 
Chapter 5 



Chapters 1, 2 and 3 
Chapter 4 


Ixxviii Introduction 

Chapter 6 Chapter 5 

Chapter 7 Chapter 6 

Chapter 8 Chapter 7 

The puzzling division of Book I into seven rather than eight chapters is 
strongly represented in the Latin MSS. As we have noted earlier. Chapter 1 in 
the Arabic is called a ‘preface to the [whole] Book’ [sadr al-kitdb] as well as ‘the 
first chapter’ [al-fasl aUawwal ], but this would not have been known to Latin 
scholars if the chapter had never been translated. The same number of 
divisions is found, for example, in the Edinburgh Royal Observatory 
MSCR3.3 (thirteenth century), in the British Library Royal MS 12. G. VII 
(fourteenth century) and in the Vienna Nationalbibliothek MS 5322 (fifteenth 
century). The actual divisions are the same in Risner and in the Edinburgh and 
Vienna MSS, in both of which these divisions are numbered. No numbers are 
provided in the Royal MS and here the divisions or chapters, clearly indicated 
by large initial letters, do not all coincide with those of Risner. Thus in this 
manuscript Chapters 1, 4 and 5 coincide with the similarly numbered chapters 
in Risner. But Chapter 3 (fol. i v B: Et iterum visum multoties latent quaedam 
res . . .) begins before the end of Risner’s Chapter 2 (at Risner’s p. 2, 1 . 46); 
Chapter 4 (fol. 2 r A: Et cum luces fortes visibilium occultent quasdam res . . .) begins 
near the middle of Risner’s Chapter 3 (at Risner’s p. 3, 1 . 18); and Chapter 7 
combines Risner’s Chapters 6 and 7. Risner’s titles for his Chapters I, 4, 5, 6 
and 7 correspond (with minor variations) to the Arabic titles of Chapters 4, 5, 
6, 7 and 8 respectively. In the Edinburgh MS titles for the seven chapters have 
been grouped together at the bottom of page 2; the Royal MS has no titles for 
these chapters; and in the Vienna MS the seven chapters are all provided with 
descriptive titles which are not identical with those of Risner. 

But not all manuscripts divide Book I into seven parts or chapters. Of 
particular interest in this respect is the Paris Bibliotheque Nationale MS 
lat. 7247 (fourteenth century). This beautifully executed MS has no chapter 
titles or numbers throughout Book I, but capital letters in blue and red mark 
chapter beginnings. The divisions thus indicated number eight, not seven as in 
Risner and in the three manuscripts just cited. The number eight is obtained 
by dividing the text corresponding to Arabic Chapter 4 into four divisions 
(not three, as in Risner), followed by four more divisions which coincide with 
Risner’s Chapters 4, 5, 6 and 7 (= Arabic Chapters 5, 6, 7 and 8). Thus here, it 
seems, we have an attempt to conform to the correct number of chapters in the 
Arabic text, which is not as surprising as the more frequent division into seven 
chapters. 

Some discrepancies also exist in Book II, the text of which is complete both 
in the Latin manuscripts and in Risner. Book II in the Arabic consists of four 


V. Latin translation lxxix 

chapters preceded by a table of contents. The latter is not in Risner. Arabic 
Chapter 1 (described in the Arabic as a Preface) exists in Risner’s edition but is 
there considered an introductory paragraph, not a separate chapter, and is not, 
therefore, numbered. Arabic Chapter 2 then corresponds to Risner’s 
Chapter 1, Sections 1-9; Arabic Chapter 3 corresponds to Risner’s Chapter 1, 
Sections 10-15 plus Chapter 2; and, finally, Arabic Chapter 4 corresponds to 
Risner’s Chapter 3. The following table clearly exhibits the relationship 
between the two texts: 


Arabic Text 


Book II 

Risner’s Edition 


Table of Concents for Book II 
Chapter 1 (Preface) 

Chapter 2 
Chapter 3 
Chapter 4 


Not in Risner 

Not numbered in Risner 

Chapter 1, Sections 1-9 

Chapter 1 , Sections 10-1 5 and Chapter 2 

Chapter 3 


In this case the Vienna MS just mentioned is closer to the Arabic. Like 
Risner’s text it omits the table of contents for Book II, but explicitly describes 
this Book as containing four chapters. The prooemium (corresponding to 
Chapter 1 in the Arabic) is not numbered, but the chapter following it is 
marked ‘Ca:2’ in the margin. Chapters 3 and 4 then correspond to the 
similarly numbered Arabic chapters. 

In contrast to the first two Books, Risner’s edition (and most of the Latin 
manuscripts) agree with the Arabic text in dividing Book III into seven 
identical chapters. 

The Latin translation itself closely follows the Arabic text throughout the 
first two Books and the first two chapters in Book III, but with a few minor 
omissions in addition to omitting the whole of Chapters 1-3 in Book I, and 
with occasional inconsistency and unfortunate choice of terms and the 
understandable lack of sharpness of expression. With the beginning of 
Chapter 3 in Book III, the Latin version ceases to be a faithful translation and 
turns into a kind of paraphrase that sometimes drastically cuts short the text 
and sometimes even distorts it. Consequences of this for editing the Arabic 
text are pointed out in section VII of this Introduction. There are other 
important discrepancies relating to Books IV-VII, but these need not be 
discussed in this volume. 


lxxx 


Introduction 


VI. Manuscripts 


lxxxi 


VI 

MANUSCRIPTS of KITAB AL-MANAZIR 

The Arabic text of I. H.’s Optics , Kitab al-Manazir, survives in five copies, all 
of which are in libraries at Istanbul and only one of which has the complete 
text of the book. 130 The oldest of these copies consists of five volumes which 
make up what I shall call the "Askari Set, after the copyist, Ahmad ibn 
Muhammad ibn Ja'far al-' Askari, who is described at the end of the first 
volume in this set as I. H.’s son-in-law ( sihr al-muallif ). The set must have 
originally consisted of seven volumes (or parts: ajza ’) each of which contained 
one of the seven Books or Maqalas that constitute I. H.’s work. But two of 
these volumes or parts, comprising Books IV and V, have not been located 
anywhere. Of the five volumes that are known to exist, four (namely those for 
Books I, II, III and VII) belonged to the library of the mosque named after 
Sultan Muhammad al-Fatih (the Conqueror) and are now kept at the Siiley- 
maniye Library. The volume for Book VI is in the Ahmet III Library (now 
called the New Library) at the Topkapi Sarayi Museum. All five volumes 
were executed in A. h. 476/A. D. 1083-84, and all are clearly written by the same 
hand. It is indicated at the end of volumes II and VII that these two volumes 
were executed at Basra, and we may assume this to be true also of the other 
volumes; Basra is the city where I. H. may have been born and where he must 
have lived before he settled in Egypt. It is also likely that the whole * Askarl Set 
was copied from the author’s autograph. 131 

The following is a list of the five manuscript volumes that make up the 
extant portion of the " Askari Set: 


130 All these copies have been known to exist at least since the end of 1936 when Max Krause 
published a list of them in his ‘Stambuler Handschriften islamischer Mathematiker’, pp. 437- 
532, esp. p. 476, no. 15. Brockelmann included a reference to Krause’s list in GAL, Suppl. I 
(Leiden, 1937), p. 853, no. 34. The Paris Bibliotheque Nationale MS arabe 2460, to which 
Brockelmann refers in GAL, I 2 , p. 619. no. 34, and in Suppl. I, p. 853 (where the MS number is 
mistakenly given as 2640), is not ‘ein kleiner Auszug’ of I. H. ’s Kitab al-Manazir , but a recension 
of Euclid’s Optics which is ascribed on the title page to Hasan [ibn Musa] ibn Shakir. Mustafa 
Nazif’s al-Hasan ibn al-Haytham, buhuthuhu wa kushujuhu al-basariyya , 2 vols. (Cairo, 1942-43) 
was the first extensive study that made use of the Istanbul copies o {Kitab al-Manazir , with the 
exception of MSS Kopriilii 952 and Ahmet III 1899. As far as I know the Kopriilii MS has never 
been used in any published study of I. H. Nazif gives a description of the MSS he used in vol. 1 of 
his book, pp. t-n. 

131 M. Nazif ( al-Hasan y 1, p. m) has drawn attention to marginal notes in MS Ahmet III 3339 
(fols 128b, 129b and 133b) which imply that the copyist, Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn JaTar 
al- f Askari, used the author’s autograph of Bk VI. 


Book I: Fatih 3212. 141 fols. Dated Sunday, 15 Jumada I, 476/A.D. 1083. 

Book II: Fatih 3213. 152 fols. Dated Sunday, 28 Jumada II, 476/A.D. 1083. 

Book III: Fatih 3214. 199 fols. Dated Sunday, 1 1 Sha'ban 476/A.D. 1083. 

Book VI: Topkapi Sarayi III. Ahmet Kutiiphanesi, no. 3339. Dated Saturday, 

7 Shawwal 476/A.D. 1084. 

Book VII: Fatih 3216. Dated Friday, 15 Ramadan 476/A.D. 1084. 

The next oldest copy is MS Fatih 3215; comprising 332 folios, it was written 
in the first decade ofjumada II, 636/ a.d. 1239, i.e. one hundred and fifty-five 
years after the "Askari Set was completed. It contains Book IV (fols i-i37b) 
and Book V (fols 1382-3 3 2b) and, as M. Nazlf has observed, 132 it was prob- 
ably copied from the two corresponding parts of the "Askari Set that are now 
missing. 

Next in chronological order is MS Kopriilii 952. It differs from all other 
copies in that it is written in a maghribt (North- African) hand (or rather hands). 
It is incomplete, containing only sections of Books IV, V, VI and VII. Not all 
of its 1 3 5 folios have been bound in the correct order and no date of copying is 
stated in it, but it seems to have been written in the fourteenth century a.d. 133 
It cannot at present be determined whether this manuscript, too, derives 
directly or indirectly from the once complete "Askari Set, but this is not 
impossible. It has in any case one important advantage over all extant 
manuscripts of Kitab al-Manazir: it includes the geometrical diagrams for the 
parts of Books IV and V which it contains. These diagrams are missing from 
the only two other manuscripts that contain the text of these two Books, 
namely MSS Fatih 3215 and Ayasofya 2448 (see below), in both of which 
places for the diagrams have been left blank. The Kopriilii MS is therefore 
independent of at least these two manuscripts. 

Fourth in order of execution is MS Ayasofya 2448, now kept at the 
Siileymaniye Library. Dated a.h. 899/A. d. 1493-94, it comprises 677 folios. 
This is the only copy that has the whole text of I. H. ’s work. As has been 
pointed out by M. Na?if, it was transcribed from the "Askari Set (as comple- 
mented by MS Fatih 3215), the scribal errors and marginal corrections of 
which it faithfully imitates. 134 Books I*— III in the Ayasofya manuscript occupy 
folios 1-3 1 5a. 

The fifth copy is MS Topkapi Sarayi III. Ahmet Kiitiiphanesi, no. 1899. 
Dated a.h. 915/A. d. 1509 (the date written at the end of Book I is Sunday, 
2 $afar 915 and at the end of Book II is Wednesday, 30 Rabf I, 915), it contains 
only the first three Books, which occupy its 249 folios. It is explicitly stated on 

132 Nazif, al-Hasan , 1, pp. y-fe. 

133 Krause, ‘Stambuler Handschriften’, p. 476. 

134 Nazif, al-Hasan , 1, p. n. 


MANUSCRIPTS OP KITAH A! MANAZIR 



book VII Fatih 3216 fob ja-b fols 6o9b-677b 

138 fols 4«a-73b 

Fri. mid. Ramadan 476 82a-88b 

A. D. 1084, Basra 


VII. Arabic text & this translation 


Ixxxiii 


the first page that this copy was transcribed from a copy completed on 
15 Jumada I, 476 and claiming to have been written by the author’s son-in- 
law, that is, from MSS Fatih 3212, 3213 and 3214 in the Wskarl Set. Note, 
however, that 1 5 Jumada I, 476 is the date of only the first of these three Fatih 
MSS. The critical apparatus in my edition of the Arabic text shows that a 
comparison between the Ahmet III MS and the Fatih MSS bears out this 
statement. 

It is clear from the above account that, as far as Books I— III are concerned, 
the text of Kitab al-Manazir now exists in three copies, of which two 
(Ayasofya 2448 and Ahmet III 1899) have been transcribed from the third 
copy made up of the first three volumes in the extant 'Askari Set, i.e. from 
MSS Fatih 3212, 3213 and 3214. For a more detailed description of all these 
manuscripts the reader is referred to my edition of Books I— III of Kitab 
al-Manazir. 135 


EDITION OF THE ARABIC TEXT AND ENGLISH TRANSLATION 
OF THE OPTICS , BOOKS I— III 

The present translation of Books I— III of the Optics is based on my edition of 
the first three maqalas of Kitab al-Manazir , published in 1983. As has been 
noted in the preceding section, the Arabic text of these three books survives in 
three copies, two of which (Ayasofya 2448, fols 1-3152, and Ahmet III 1899, 
249 fols) were transcribed directly from the third, consisting of the first three 
volumes in the 'Askari copy of Kitab al-Manazir — namely: MSS Fatih 3212 
(Book I), 3213 (Book II) and 3214 (Book III). My edition has, therefore, been 
based primarily on the "Askari volumes whose page numbers appear in the 
margins of the Arabic edition and of the English translation. For example, a 
sequence of the form 'I 23a’ in the margin of the English translation refers to 
MS Fatih 3212, fol. 23a. In the Arabic edition an Arabic numeral followed by a 
slash takes the place of the Roman numeral. Use has also been made of the 
Ayasofya and Ahmet III manuscripts, mainly for the purpose of demonstrat- 
ing their derivation from the 'Askar! copy. 

Fortunately the 'Askari copy was carefully executed and has been well 
preserved. Written in a clear naskht hand, it is profusely supplied with 
diacritical points and vowel signs, and its sentences and paragraphs are 
frequently distinguished by punctuation signs. As previously noted, the 
copyist, al- c Askari, was a relative of I. H.’s, and it is likely that he transcribed 

135 Kitab al-Manazir I-II-III, editor’s Introduction, pp. 36-43. 



lxxxiv 


Introduction 


VII. Arabic text & this translation 


lxxxv 


the whole text from a prototype in the author’s handwriting. We know that 
al-' Askar! utilized the author’s autograph of at least Book VI. 136 

A few, usually not very important, omissions of words or phrases and also 
some errors of transcription occur, however, in the 'Askar! copy; and the 
majority of these are repeated in the Ayasofya and Ahmet III manuscripts. 
With respect to these minor defects the Latin translation has been more helpful 
in restoring the text than Kamal al-DIn’s Tanqih ; as already remarked, the text 
ascribed in the Tanqih to I. H. is a paraphrase rather than a verbatim repro- 
duction. All emendations suggested or confirmed by the Latin translation 
have been recorded in the critical apparatus included in the Arabic edition. Use 
of the Latin version has been restricted, however, by the absence from it of the 
first three chapters in Book I and by the fact that it freely paraphrases rather 
than closely follows the text of Chapters 3-7 in Book III. 

Collation of the Arabic text with the Latin translation in Risner’s edition of 
1572 has yielded the Arabic-Latin Glossaries and Concordance found in Part II 
of this volume (and in the Arabic edition) . Because of the character of the Latin 
version for Chapters 3-7 in Book III it has not been possible in many instances 
to make exact correlatiflns between Arabic and Latin expressions. I am not 
sure whether the entire Latin version of the Optics was the work of one or 
more than one translator. But rather than present a composite picture of what 
was in any case a mixture ofdifferent styles of rendering the Arabic text, I have 
decided to restrict the glossaries to Books I and II and the first two chapters in 
Book III. I believe that with this restriction the glossaries almost certainly 
reflect the work of a single translator. The glossaries also deliberately include 
idiomatic expressions and phrases that can often be more helpful than 
technical terms in identifying a translator’s practice. While these glossaries are 
far from being complete, I hope that the general index (to be appended to the 
forthcoming second Arabic volume), along with the concordance tables, will 
make up for their deficiency. In the Latin-Arabic Glossary I have indicated a 
few places in which words can be seen in context; the reader should bear in 
mind that these selective references are not meant to serve as an index. 

The concordance tables make use of the marginal numbers in the Arabic and 
English editions (indicating volume and page in the 'Askar! Set) and page and 
line numbers in Risner’s edition. But, again, such precise references to the 
Latin text have not been possible beyond Chapter 2 in Book III. For the 
remaining chapters in this Book I have had to make do with references to 
numbered sections (or propositions) in Risner’s text. Even with this draw- 
back the tables should make it easy for the reader to compare the English (or 
Arabic) text with the Latin version. 

136 See n. 131 above. 


To translate a medieval Arabic scientific text into a modern European 
language is to perform a technical, not primarily a literary, task; by this I mean 
that concern for exactness in conveying content and, if possible, forms of 
expression must always take precedence over considerations of style. The 
principal aim is not to put the medieval text in a style acceptable to modern 
taste, but to put the non-Arabic reader, and especially the historian, in a 
position to appreciate the problems involved in interpreting the original, and 
thus enable him or her as much as possible to form independent judgements. 
Nothing at all is achieved, of course, if comprehensibility is sacrificed for the 
sake of dubious faithfulness or illusory literality; and, as every translator 
knows, a little additional effort can often improve readability without doing 
away with precision. I have not spared that extra effort, but I have resisted the 
temptation to polish the text at the expense of faithful rendition. It will not be 
necessary to enumerate here the kinds of problem I have encountered in 
making the translation and the various devices I have adopted in dealing with 
them. Such problems and devices, especially those concerned with specific 
key expressions, have been frequently indicated in the notes forming part of 
the Commentary on the translation. 

The Optics , or certain parts of it, has been characterized by readers of the 
Arabic and Latin texts as ‘excessively long’, ‘verbose’, ‘prolix’, ‘weari- 
some’. 137 There is some truth in these criticisms. Again and again, the reader 
will feel that fewer sentences might have sufficed to express an argument or 
describe a series of observations or experiments. Always, however, the 
sentences themselves are carefully, even painstakingly, constructed, and they 
are always ordered with close attention to logical sequence. And while I. H. 
frequently intersperses his expositions with repetitions (often they are repeti- 
tions of antecedents in complex conditional arguments), the more striking fact 
is that he almost never digresses and he never rambles. Few, if any, medieval 
Arabic scientific texts surpass the Optics as an exercise in clear, precise and 
orderly writing. This is all the more remarkable when we realize that the best 
available text that could have served I. H. as a model for his own exposition 
was Ptolemy’s far shorter and incomplete treatise. It is easy to note the 
prolixity of I. H. ’s prose. It is more difficult, and more interesting, to explain 
the stylistic features of a text written long ago by someone whose training, 

137 The words quoted are those of Kamal al-Din ( Tanqih , 1, p. 7), Witelo, Isaac Barrow and 
Christiaan Huygens, respectively. Witelo, in the dedicatory preface to his Perspectiva , spoke 
generally of the ‘verbosity of the Arabs’ but he undoubtedly had I. H.’s Optics , his principal 
source, specifically in mind (Risner’s edition, p. 1). ‘Horribly prolix’ and ‘too long and 
wearisome’ ( longa admodum ac tediosa) were criticisms levelled against I. H.’s solution of the 
so-called ‘Alhazen’s problem’ in Bk V of the Optics. Cf. A. I. Sabra, ‘Ibn al-Haytham’s Lemmas 
for solving “Alhazen’s problem” ’, pp. 299-300 and n. 4. 


lxxxvi Introduction 

mental habits, didactic aims and methods of composition differed greatly 
from our own. I shall not here attempt such an explanation. But one thing 
needs to be said: to resort to ‘Arabic verbosity’ (which is usually done by 
commentators ignorant of Arabic) will not do in this case. The genius of the 
Arabic language in fact lies in conciseness, even severe economy, of expres- 
sion; verbosity became a prominent feature only in periods of decadence to 
which I. H. did not belong. 

Although each of the seven Books of the Optics is divided in the Arabic 
manuscripts into chapters, these tend to be few in number and some of them 
are quite long, with no explicit indications of the topics discussed in them. 

Chapter 3 in Book II, for example, constitutes more than one third of that 
whole Book; and although it deals with the enumerated objects of vision in an 
orderly manner, the reader has to find for himself where the discussion of each 
of these begins and where it ends. Another example is in Book III where the last 
chapter takes up 1 2 1 pages (in the printed edition) , leaving only seventy pages 
for the first six chapters. There are signs in the ' Askari Set that this chapter was 
intended (probably by the author himself) to be divided into smaller sections 
and sub-sections marked by alphabetical numerals; but for some reason this 
plan was not carried through to the end of the chapter, an omission which may 
be due to the copyist. It is clear, as Kamal al-Din and Risner realized, that the 
reader and the book would be better served by introducing some necessary 
divisions. Following their example to some extent, I have supplied section and 
sub-section headings which I have enclosed in angle brackets in the Arabic 
volume and in square brackets in the English translation. 

The continuous, undifferentiated prose of I. H.’s exposition, besides being 
a source of annoyance to the reader, has tended to obscure what I believe to be 
one of the most distinctive and most important features of the book: namely 
its adherence to definite forms of argumentation that mainly consist of 
empirical observations frequently followed by experimental verifications in 
which geometrical proofs are sometimes employed. The arguments may be 
long, but their components are clearly expressed and clearly organized. One is 
almost never at a loss in the Optics to know what the problem under discussion 
is or exactly what the author’s reasons are for coming to a certain conclusion. I 
have tried to bring out the structure of I. H.’s arguments by dividing his text 
into numbered paragraphs that seemed to me to correspond to logical steps or 
transitions in those arguments. Frequently my divisions coincide with div- 
isions actually marked in the 'Askari Set, but on the whole they reflect my 
own understanding of the text and my own judgement as to the best form in 
which to present it. They perform the added practical function of facilitating 1 

cross-references in the Commentary by means of a sequence of three numbers 
indicating Book (Roman numerals), chapter (Arabic numerals), and paragraph 


VIII. Synopsis. Book I lxxxvii 

(Arabic numerals in square brackets), in this order. It was again for the 
purpose of revealing the structure of the first three Books that I prepared the 
Synopsis presented in the next section of this Introduction. As well as serving 
as a guide to the topics dealt with in these Books, a quick perusal of this 
Synopsis should dissipate any preconceived or hasty impression about the 
form and character of I. H.’s method of writing. 

VIII 

SYNOPSIS OF THE OPTICS , BOOKS I— III 

BOOK I 

ON THE MANNER OF VISION IN GENERAL 
CHAPTER I 

PREFACE TO THE [WHOLE] BOOK 
I, i [1-8] 

The differing opinions of early investigators regarding the nature of vision 
and the manner of visual sensation [1]. The investigation of vision combines 
the natural and the mathematical sciences [2]. Opinions of natural scientists 
and mathematicians concerning the nature of vision [3]. The differing views 
of mathematicians as to the structure of the ray and the manner of its 
production; the doctrine which they share among themselves [4-5]* Aim and 
method of the Optics [6]. The Optics is divided into seven books — their titles 
[7]. The Optics replaces an earlier ‘treatise’ by Ibn al-Haytham on the same 
subject [8]. 

CHAPTER 2 

INQUIRY INTO THE PROPERTIES OF SIGHT 
I, 2 [l~26] 

Conditions of rectilinear vision: a distance must exist between the eye and the 
visible object [1 ]. The lines imagined to extend between the eye and the object 
must not be interrupted by an opaque body [2-5]. Experimental examination 
of this notion by means of rulers and tubes [6-9]. Sight only perceives objects 
in which light exists either of themselves or from other objects [10]. The 
visible object must be of a certain size [1 1] and must be opaque or have some 
opacity in it [12]. The distances from which objects may be visible vary with 
the sizes of these objects [13] and with their illumination [14-15]. They also 


lxxxviii Introduction 

vary with the objects' colours [16 — 1 8] and with the power of sight [19]. 

Summing up the conditions without the combination of which objects cannot 
be perceived by sight [20-21]. Definition of ‘moderate’ and ‘immoderate’ 
distances [22-25]. Conclusion [26]. j 

i 

CHAPTER 3 I 

INQUIRY INTO THE PROPERTIES OF LIGHTS | 

AND INTO THE MANNER OF RADIATION OF LIGHTS 1 

I, 3 [1-144] | 

Light shines from self-luminous bodies upon facing bodies — this is apparent 
in the case of the sun, the moon and fire [i]. All lights radiate in straight lines 
— experimental examination of the lights that pass through apertures and 
doors into obscure or dark chambers: examination of light from the sun, the 
moon and the stars, and from fire [2-6]. This notion is shown to be true for all 
kinds of light by the formation of shadows [7]. Conclusion [8]. j 

Light radiates from every part of a self-luminous body in every straight line 
that extends from that part: experimental examination of the light from the 
sun [9-14], from the moon [15], and from fire [16-18]. Conclusion [19]. This 
state of affairs is also apparent in the case of small parts of self-luminous bodies 
[20]. Summary — ‘primary lights’ defined [21]. 

Examination of the manner in which light radiates from ‘accidental light’ 

[22-24]. Experimental examination of this manner by means of dark chambers 
[25-27]. Evening light [28]. Experimental examination of the radiation of light 
from accidental light — morning light [29-34]. Light emanates from every part | 

of the illuminated air to every opposite side [35-36]. Conclusion [37-38]. 

Objection against this statement [39]. A reply and an explanation of the reason 
why light appears on the surface of the earth in the morning and evening but not 
at night [40-42]. Another objection [43] and a reply to it [44-47]. 

Experimental examination of the lights that radiate from accidental lights 
and appear on opaque bodies, by considering a white wall exposed to daylight 
[48-84] or sunlight [85] or moonlight [86]. Conclusion regarding the radiation 
of lights from the accidental lights that exist in opaque bodies [87]. 

Secondary lights do not emanate from accidental lights by way of reflection 
but as primary and essential lights originate from self-luminous bodies 
(88—98]. Experimental examination of this notion by means of a chamber 
entered into by sunlight [89-94], moonlight [95] or firelight [96]. Summary 
[97]. Light radiates in all directions from every part of an opaque body in 
which accidental light exists [98]. 

Reflected lights extend from the point of reflection along certain straight | 

lines [99-103]- Experimental examination of this notion [100-103]. 


VIII. Synopsis. Book I Ixxxix 

Lights, after entering transparent bodies whose transparency differs from 
that of air, also extend in straight lines [104-107]. Experimental examination 
of this notion [105-107]. Secondary lights also radiate from the point in the 
transparent body at which the traversing light emerges [108-109]. 

Summary — all essential and accidental lights radiate in straight lines [no], 
and secondary lights are weaker than those from which they originate [in], 
and reflected lights extend on specific straight lines and the same is true of the 
lights that pass through transparent bodies [1 12]. 

The colours of opaque bodies that shine with accidental light accompany 
the lights that radiate from those bodies [1 1 3-128]. Experimental examination 
of this notion by means of chambers [1 17-12 1]. The forms of colours that 
appear on bodies facing the illuminated coloured object are not perceived by 
reflection [122-123]. The colours of transparent bodies extend along with the 
lights that pass through them — experimental examination of this notion by 
observation of coloured beverages [1 24-1 27]. Summary [128]. 

It is possible that the air and other transparent bodies might receive the 
forms of colours whether light is present or not [129]. And it is possible that 
colours must be illuminated for their forms to emanate from them [130]- It is 
certain, however, that the form of light and the form ot colour together 
proceed from illuminated coloured bodies [13 1]. 

Error of those who believe that colour is not real and that it is something 
that arises as a result of the effect oflight upon sight [132-133]. Establishment 
of the fact that colours are real and that they are forms existing in the coloured 
body [1 34-1 39]. The form of colour perceived on the body facing a coloured 
object is not something that arises as a result of the effect of the light or the 
colour upon sight [140]. Therefore the forms of the light and colour that exist 
in every illuminated coloured body always extend in all directions whether an 
eye is present or not [141]. The form of colour, like the form oflight, extends 
from every point on the surface of the illuminated coloured body in every 
straight line that extends from that point — whether an eye is present or not 
[142-143]. The reason why the form of colour does not appear on all bodies 
facing the coloured bodies will be shown in the discussion on the manner of 
vision, i.e. in Book I, Chapter 6 [144]. 

CHAPTER 4 

ON THE EFFECT OF LIGHT UPON SIGHT 

I, 4 [l-28] 

Strong lights cause the eye to suffer pain; they affect the eye and their forms 
persist in it [1-5]. Sight is affected by illuminated colours, and their forms 
persist in the eye [6-7]. Strong lights hinder sight from perceiving some 


xc 


Introduction 


VIII. Synopsis. Book I 


xci 


objects whose lights are weak [8— io]. Strong lights in some visible objects may 
cause the disappearance of some features in those objects, while weak lights in 
some objects may cause those features to appear [i i-i 9]. Perception of colours 
varies with the lights that shine upon them [20-26] . Summary [27] . The reason 
why strong lights hinder the perception of some objects will be shown in the 
discussion on the manner of vision, i.e. in Book I, Chapter 6 [28]. 

chapter 5 

ON THE STRUCTURE OF THE EYE 

l 5 [i-39] 

The coats, tissues and bodies of which the eye is composed [1-12]. The two 
hollow nerves [2]. The two apertures in the concavities of the bones [3]. The 
coats of the eye [4-12]: the conjunctiva [5], the uvea [6-7], the cornea [8], the 
crystalline [9], the vitreous [10], the extremity of the optic nerve [n], the 
albugineous [12]. Order of the coats of the eye and their transparency [13]. 
The visual spirit [14]. The conic shape of the nerve [15]. The nerve bends, 
when the eye moves, at the hole in the bone’s concavity [16-17]. The exterior 
and interior surfaces of the cornea are spherical and parallel [18-19]. 

Positions of the coats of the eye and of their centres, and position of the 
straight line that passes through these centres [20-36]. 

The two eyes are similar in all their conditions [37]. The eye-muscles, 
eyelids and eyelashes [38]. The composition of the eye has been shown by 
anatomists in anatomical books — picture of the two eyes [39]. 

chapter 6 

ON THE MANNER OF VISION 

I, 6 [1-116] 

Lights and the forms of illuminated colours radiate to the opposite sides — the 
intermingling of the forms of light and colour [1-4]. Establishment of the 
preceding statement — sight senses the light and the colour from their forms 
[5-6]. Vision is not accomplished merely by the occurrence of the forms in the 

eye [7-1 1]. 

Conditions for the distinct arrangement of the colours and parts of a single 
object in the eye — the forms of lights and colours come to the whole surface 
of the eye from every point on the object’s surface [12]. A condition of distinct 
vision is that the eye should sense through a single point on its surface only the 
form that comes to it from a single point on the surface of the object [13]. 
Beginning of the investigation as to whether this notion is possible and 
whether it agrees with what exists [14]: 


Vision occurs by means of the crystalline humour [14-15]. Distinct vision 
can only be due to the sensing of every single point on the object through a 
single point on the crystalline [16-17]. Lights extend on straight lines in 
homogeneously transparent bodies, and are generally refracted upon enter- 
ing into bodies with differing transparency — this will be shown experimen- 
tally in Book VII [18]. The forms of lights and colours are in most cases 
refracted as they pass through the coats of the eye [19]. Asa result, the forms 
coming from different points on the object are mixed together on the 
crystalline’s surface [20-22]. The forms that come to the eye along perpen- 
diculars to the crystalline’s surface are distinct from all other forms [23]. The 
effect of the forms along the perpendiculars is stronger than that of forms on 
inclined lines [24]. 

Forms along perpendiculars to the surface of the eye do not meet at the 
surface of the crystalline [25]. The forms come to the eye in the shape of a cone 
whose base is the object’s surface and whose vertex is the centre of the eye, i.e. 
the centre of the crystalline’s outward surface [26-28]; forms occur in that part 
of the crystalline’s surface that is contained by the cone, and they are arranged 
by the perpendiculars intersecting that surface [29]. The crystalline will have a 
distinct sensation of the forms that come to it along perpendiculars to its 
surface [30], but not if sensation were possible through refracted forms [31]. 
The crystalline does not therefore sense any of the refracted forms [32]. 

Only forms along the perpendiculars will be arranged on the crystalline’s 
surface in the same way as they are outside the eye [33-38]. This notion will be 
thoroughly examined experimentally in Book VII [36]. Therefore, sight 
perceives only those forms that come to it along straight lines that meet at the 
centre of the eye [39]. 

Only if the centre of the eye’s surface is the same as that of the crystalline’s 
surface will the forms be correctly arranged on the latter, and only then will 
the crystalline sense the forms with their proper order [40-41]. Sight is 
naturally characterized by receiving the forms along certain lines, i.e. those 
that meet at the eye’s centre [42]. This characteristic has parallels in nature 
[43]. Sight, therefore, perceives objects of vision only along the straight lines 
that meet at the eye’s centre [44]. 

Establishment of what has been settled so far [45-55]. Sight senses the 
object through something produced in it by the object [47]. Sight perceives 
the visible object only if the body that lies between them is transparent [48]. 
That which the object produces in the eye can be brought about only by means 
of the transparency of the intermediate body [49]. The property of the 
transparent is that it receives and conveys the forms of lights and colours [50]. 
Those who hold the doctrine of visual rays believe that the transparent 
receives from the eye something which it conveys to the object [51]. In any 


xcii Introduction 

case, vision occurs only when something reaches the eye from the object [52]. 
That which comes from the object to the eye is nothing other than the forms of 
light and colour [53]. The [notion of] extramission of rays is therefore futile 
and redundant [54]. Vision is therefore possible only through forms that come 
along perpendiculars to the eye's surface and the crystalline's surface; and the 
centres of the eye and of the crystalline are one [55]. 

The visual-ray doctrine uncovered. What is false and what is valid in it 
[56-60]. Nothing issues from the eye and senses the object [56]. Explanation 
of the preceding statement — the reason that led to the doctrine of visual rays 
[57]. This reason is false [58]. The radial lines made use of by mathematicians 
are only imaginary lines without which vision cannot be achieved [59]. 
Conclusion [60]. 

Summary [61-64]. What we have shown is how, in general, vision takes 
place, and it is in agreement with the opinions held by the learned among 
physicists and by mathematicians [61]. For sensation is due only to the form’s 
effect in the eye, and the radial lines are imaginary lines by means of which the 
manner in which the form affects the eye is determined [62]. Formation of the 
radial cone between the object and the eye. The form is ordered within this 
cone and on the part of the crystalline’s surface that is cut off by this cone [63]. 
Sensation occurs only through the crystalline. The forms traverse the crystal- 
line on account of its transparency and are fixed in it on account of its grossness 

[64]. 

The crystalline is disposed to sensation on account of the sensitive capacity 
in it, and it is disposed to receive the forms along the radial lines [65]. 
Sensation results from the form’s action upon the crystalline and the latter’s 
being affected by the form [66]. The effect of light on the crystalline is of the 
nature of pain, and therefore the crystalline’s sensation of the effect of light is a 
sensation like the sensation of pain [67]. 

How the sensation extends to the last sentient [68—76]. The sensation that 
occurs at the crystalline extends through the subtle body in the hollow nerve 
to the front of the brain, where the last sentient is [68]. The visible objects are 
seen with two eyes. The forms in the two eyes meet in the common nerve 
[69]. Proof that the last sentient perceives the form that is combined from the 
two forms [70-72]. Proof that vision does not take place through the eye 
alone: a single object is sometimes seen single and sometimes double [73-74]. 
Sensations extend from the organs of sense to the last sentient through the 
nerves [75]. Proof that the forms extend in the cavity of the nerve until they 
reach the last sentient [76]. 

The reason why the two forms meet when a single object is seen as one, but 
not when the object is seen double: the difference in the position of the eyes in 
the two cases [77-79]. 


VIII. Synopsis. Book I xciii 

It may be said that the forms in the eye do not extend to the common nerve 
but only the sensation in the eye does so, in the manner of extension of painful 
and tactile sensations [80]. The sensation in the eye is not only a sensation of 
pain but also of the illumination, colour and order of the object’s parts [81]. 
Summing up the manner of vision [82]. 

It may be said that since the forms of lights and colours become mingled in 
the transparent bodies and arrive intermingled at the eye, the sensation in the 
eye cannot be due to these forms [83]. We reply that the transparent bodies 
are not tinctured by the colours and the lights but receive them only as 
conductors without being altered by them [84]. Proof that lights and colours 
do not mix in the air or in other transparent bodies. The lights from separate 
lamps placed in front of a single aperture appear separately and in the same 
number as the lamps upon a wall behind the aperture [85]. Experimental 
examination of this fact by means of a chamber in a dark night [86-87]. 
What applies to lights also applies to colours [88]. And the foregoing is true 
of all transparent bodies [89]. 

The reception of the forms of light and colour by the crystalline humour is 
not like their reception by transparent and non-sensitive bodies — the 
crystalline is disposed to sense the forms and suffer pain on account of them 
without being constantly tinctured by them [90]. Objection based on what is 
known of the persistence of the effects of strong lights and colours in the eye 
for a sensible interval of time [91]. But the disappearance of these effects after a 
while is proof that the eye is not permanently tinged by them [92]. The eye is 
therefore disposed to be affected by light and colour to sense them and to 
convey their forms [93]. Summary [94]. 

The reason why the forms of some colours but not of others appear on 
opposite bodies — explanation by means of experiment and induction 
[95-107]. 

The reason why strong lights and colours prevent sight from perceiving 
some objects and cause the disappearance of some features in visible objects 
[108-1 15]. The forms that come to the eye on one line are seen as mixed [108]. 
Sight does not perceive the stars in daylight because the light of the sun in the 
atmosphere is stronger than that of the stars [109]. The form of a strong light, 
like that of the sun, dominates the form of weak lights in its midst, such as the 
form of fire or firefly [no]. Disappearance of faint lights when a strong light 
occurs in the eye [in], and the reason for this [112]. Parallels in the case ot 
colours [1 1 3-1 1 5]. Conclusion [116]. 


XC1V 


Introduction 


VIII. Synopsis. Book II 


xcv 


CHAPTER 7 

ON THE UTILITIES OF THE INSTRUMENTS OF SIGHT 

I. 7[i-i8] 

The coats of the eye are instruments through whose structure and positions 
vision is achieved [i]. Use of the cornea [2]. Use of the albugineous humour 
[3]. Use of the uvea [4]. Use of the crystalline humour [5]. Use of the tissue 
covering the crystalline [6]. Use of the hollow nerve [7]. The reason why the 
two hollow nerves begin on either side of the front of the brain [8]. Why the 
eyes are two [9). Why the two hollow nerves meet at the middle of the front of 
the brain [10]. 

The coats of the eye — the shape of their surfaces and why they form 
spherical and parallel surfaces having a common centre [n-12]. The reason 
why the eye perceives objects only along the perpendiculars to the surfaces of 
its coats [13]. 

Use of the conjunctiva [14]. Why the eye as a whole is round [15]. Use of the 
eyelids [16]. Use of the eyelashes [17]. Conclusion [18]. 

CHAPTER 8 

ON THE REASONS FOR THE CONDITIONS 
WITHOUT THE COMBINATION OF WHICH 
VISION IS NOT EFFECTED 
I, 8 [l— II] 

Summing up the conditions without the combination of which vision is not 
accomplished [ 1 ] . The reasons why sight requires each one of these conditions 
[2-10]. Two reasons why sight must be at a distance from the object [3-4]. 
The reason why sight requires the existence of uninterrupted lines between 
itself and the object [5]. The reason why illumination of the object is necessary 

[6] . Why sight does not perceive the object unless the latter is of a certain size 

[7] . Why perception does not take place unless the body that exists between 
the eye and the object is transparent [8]. Why sight does not perceive the object 
unless the latter is opaque or has some opacity in it [9-10]. Conclusion [i 1 ]. 


BOOK II 

ON THE VISIBLE PROPERTIES, THEIR CAUSES 
AND THE MANNER OF THEIR PERCEPTION 


CHAPTER I 
PREFACE 

II, I [ 1 - 4 ] 

Summary of what has been shown in Book I [1-2]. Sight does not perceive all 
objects and at all times in the same manner [3]. The subject of Book II is to 
show the different conditions of the radial lines and give a detailed account of 
the visible properties and the manner of their perception [4]. 


CHAPTER 2 

ON DISTINGUISHING THE LINES OF THE RAY 

II, 2 [l-30] 

Summary of what has been shown in Book I concerning radial lines and the 
extension of forms through the coats of the eye [1-4]. Vision is not accom- 
plished unless the form reaches the common nerve with its structure 
unchanged [5]. Vision is not achieved until the form which occurs in the 
crystalline’s surface has been refracted before reaching the centre of the eye 
[6-7]. The forms are refracted upon reaching the vitreous humour [8]. The 
outward surface of the vitreous is anterior to the centre of the eye and is 
regularly shaped; it is either plane or part of a large sphere of which the centre 
is different from that of the eye [9]. Summary [10]. 

The sentient organ (or crystalline) does not receive the forms in the same 
way as they are received by transparent bodies, and the extension of forms in 
the sentient body takes place along the extension of parts of the sentient body 
[1 1 ]. The reception of forms by the vitreous is not like their reception by the 
anterior part of the crystalline, and the receptive power in one differs from that 
in the other [12]. The forms are refracted in the vitreous in accordance with the 
difference in the manner of sensitive reception [13]. The reason why transpar- 
ency differs in the crystalline and vitreous humours [14]. 

The form extends in the sentient body, which extends through the hollow 
nerve, while preserving its structure despite the bending of the nerve [15]. The 
forms of any two similarly situated points in the two eyes arrive at a single 
point in the common nerve [16]. The transparency of the sentient body in the 
hollow nerve is similar to that of the vitreous [ 1 7] . In this body there exists also 
some opacity so that the forms may appear in it to the sensitive power [18]. 


XCV 1 


Introduction 


VIII. Synopsis. Book II 


XCVll 


The axis of the radial cone is perpendicular to the crystalline’s surface [19]. 
Explanation of this statement [20—23]. The forms extending along the axis of 
the cone are clearer than other forms [24]. The forms that reach the bend in the 
nerve along the axis and those closer to the axis are clearer than those farther 
from it [25]. Thus the form is not equally perceived by the sensitive faculty from 
the common nerve [26] . The conditions of objects of vision agree with what can 
be determined by induction, experimentation and reasoning [27—30]. 

CHAPTER 3 

ON THE MANNER OF PERCEIVING EACH OF 
THE PARTICULAR VISIBLE PROPERTIES 

11, 3 [1-235] 

Sight perceives the visible properties in bodies [1]. Sight does not perceive all 
visible properties by mere sensation [2-16]. Sight perceives the similarity and 
dissimilarity of individual objects by inference [2-7]. And it does not perceive 
the similarity and dissimilarity of colours or of lights by mere sensation 
[8-1 1 ]. Perception of transparency is due to judgement (or discernment) and 
inference [12-14]. Similarly, a script is perceived byjudgement and inference 
[15]. Thus many visible properties are perceived only by judgement and 
inference [16]. Judgement is an activity of the faculty ofjudgement although it 
is accomplished by mediation of the sense of sight [17]. 

Sight perceives many objects of vision by recognition [18], as in the case of 
perceiving what a thing is [19]. Perception by recognition is effected through a 
kind of inference [20]. Recognition of individuals and of species [21]. The 
inference involved in recognition differs from all other inferences — recog- 
nition occurs by means of signs and not by inspection of all features in the 
form [22]. Sight perceives many of the forms that are perceptible by inference 
only after inspecting all their features [23]. Everything perceived by recog- 
nition is perceived by signs, but not so everything that is perceived by 
inference [24]. Summary [25]. 

Many properties perceived by judgement and inference are perceived in an 
extremely short time [26]. The same applies to all syllogisms whose universal 
premisses are manifest [27]. The faculty ofjudgement does not syllogize by 
ordering and composing words [28]. The order of words in a syllogism is but 
a description of how the faculty ofjudgement arrives at a perception of the 
conclusion [29]. Visible properties which have been repeatedly perceived by 
inference come to be perceived by recognition without rehearsing the original 
inference [30-31]. 

Many of the notions perceptible by inference are wrongly thought to be 
primary notions which the mind perceives by its own nature ( e.g . the whole is 


greater than the part), but in fact they are perceived by recognition [32-34]. 
Summary [35]. 

Often it is not apparent how visible properties are perceived by inference 
and recognition at the moment of perceiving them, and there is need for a 
second inference to understand the manner of their perception [36]. This 
second inference cannot be extremely rapid but requires longer contemplation 
[37]. Man is naturally disposed to make judgements and inferences without 
being aware of performing familiar inferences [38]. Children (e.g.) make 
judgements and inferences without knowing the meaning of ‘inference’ [39]. 
Summary [40-42]. 

Demonstration of the modes in which each one of the particular properties 
is perceived and of the modes in which the faculty ofjudgement performs 
perceptual inferences [43-235]. The particular properties divide into twenty- 
two principal categories and those that fall under them [44]. Visible properties 
are perceived from the forms of the colours and lights in the visible objects, 
and therefore the discernment and inference are applied to the properties 
existing in those forms [45]. Judgement occurs when the ‘last sentient’ 
perceives the form after it reaches the common nerve [46]. The sentient body 
existing in the common nerve is tinged and illuminated by the colour and light 
of the object, and from that tingeing and illumination the last sentient 
perceives the colour and light of the object — the faculty of judgement 
perceives most of the particular properties as a result of discerning the 
properties in the object’s form [47]. Distinguishing the colour and light which 
are mixed when they reach the eye is an act of the faculty ofjudgement [48]. 

Perception of light qua light and of colour qua colour [49— 66]: The faculty of 
judgement perceives the quiddity of colour by recognition [49], and it is 
similarly the case with perception of the quiddity of light [50]. Also, sight 
perceives the quality of a colour in respect of strength and weakness by 
judgement and inference [51]. Thus that which sight perceives by mere 
sensation is light qua light and colour qua colour — everything else it perceives 
by judgement and inference [52]. Perception of colour qua colour and of light 
qua light precedes perception of the quiddity of colour and light. Experimental 
demonstration [53-56]. Perception of the quiddity of a colour takes time. 
Experiment with a multi-coloured top [57-59]. Similarly, perception of 
colour qua colour and of light qua light requires time. The form reaches the 
common nerve through the sentient body in the same way as it arrives from 
openings and apertures [60-61]. The form takes time to proceed from the air 
carrying it to the interior of the common nerve [62]. Time is required for the 
sentient organ to be affected by the forms [63]. And time is required for the 
surface of the eye to get in touch with the air carrying the form [64]. Thus time 


xcviii Introduction 

is required for the sensation of light and colour to take place [65]. Conclusion 

[ 66 ]. 

Perception of distance [67-93]. Distance from the eye, the magnitude of that 
distance and the location of the object are three things that determine the place 
of a visible object [67]. The magnitude of distance is not the same as 
remoteness or distance qua distance [68]. Perception of the magnitude of a 
distance is perception of magnitude, whereas perception of distance and 
location is due to perception of position [69]. Perception of light, colour, 
distance, location and the magnitude of distance are five things that constitute 
perception of an object in its place [70]. From perceiving the object in its own 
place the adherents of the visual-ray theory have argued that vision occurs by 
the extramission of rays. Reply to this argument [71]. Description of the 
manner of perceiving distance [72]. The faculty of judgement perceives 
distance by discernment [73]. The faculty of judgement perceives distance at 
the moment of vision without going through the details of inference [74]. 
Perception of distance together with position will be shown in the discussion 
of the way of perceiving position [75]. 

Sight’s perception of the magnitude of distance is either certain or uncertain 
[76]. The reason is that the distances of visible objects from the eye are either 
moderate or immoderate [77]. Sight cannot ascertain the magnitude of 
immoderate distances [78] . Sight does not perceive the magnitude of distances 
that do not extend along a succession of continuous bodies [79]. This notion 
applies to many objects seen on the surface of the ground. Experimental 
demonstration [80-81]. Parallel experiments apply to many visible objects 
[82-84]. 

Perception of the distances between separated objects is due to perception of 
separation; and perception of the magnitude of these distances is like the 
perception of distances of objects from the eye [85]. Summary [86]. 

The faculty of judgement conjectures the magnitudes of unascertained 
distances [87-88]. And it may also conjecture the magnitudes of moderate and 
ascertainable distances [89]. Summary [90-91]. Perception of distances 
between separated objects and perception of the magnitude of these distances 

[92] . Perception of familiar objects that stand at familiar distances from the eye 

[93] . 

Perception of position [94—120]: Position is of three kinds: position of the 
object as a whole in relation to the eye ( i.e . opposition), position of the object’s 
surface relative to the eye, and positions of parts of the object relative to one 
another [94]. Position of an object relative to another consists of its distance 
from and orientation vis-a-vis the other [95]. The faculty of judgement 


VIII. Synopsis. Book II xcix 

perceives that the object lies in a direction opposite the eye [96]. How objects 
are distinguished by their directions as a result of distinguishing the locations 
of the forms of separated objects on the eye’s surface [97]. Parallels in the case 
of objects of hearing [98]. The sentient perceives the direction through which 
it is acted on by the object’s form — as is manifest in perceptions by reflection 
from mirrors [99]. Summary of how sight perceives an object and every one 
of its parts in their proper places [100]. Perceptions of true and conjectured 
locations depend on ascertained and non-ascertained distances respectively 

[ioi]- 

Classification of visible surfaces into frontal and oblique surfaces according 
to their positions relative to the radial axis [102]. The edges of surfaces of 
objects, the lines in objects, and the intervals between objects or between their 
parts, either intersect the radial lines or are parallel to the radial lines that run 
through them [103]. Sight perceives the inclination or frontality of surfaces 
and lines from perceiving the difference or equality between the distances of 
the extremities of those surfaces and lines from the eye [104]. The same applies 
to perception of positions of frontal or inclined lines and intervals [105]. 
Frontality is either perfect or varies in degree [106]. Perception of positions of 
lines and intervals that are parallel to the radial lines is due to perception of 
opposition [107]. Conclusion [108]. 

Sight perceives excessive inclination of surfaces, lines and intervals to the 
radial lines from perceiving the location of their extremities [109]. Sight truly 
perceives frontal and slightly inclined surfaces, lines and intervals only if they 
are moderately distant from the eye [no]. Conjectural perception of the 
inclination or frontality of moderately distant surfaces, lines and intervals 
when their distances do not extend along ordered bodies [in]. Sight perceives 
the excessive inclination of surfaces, lines and intervals only if their distances 
from the eye are moderately large in comparison with their magnitudes [112]. 
Similarly, sight cannot ascertain the position of a surface, line or interval if the 
object’s form is vague, or if it is clear and the inclination is not excessive but 
their distance from the eye does not extend along ordered bodies [113]. 
Conclusion [114]. Intervals between separated and immoderately distant 
objects are seen as frontal, even if they are inclined [1 15]. Positions of visible 
objects are mostly perceived by conjecture [1 16]. Conclusion [117]. 

The positions of the parts of visible objects, and the positions of edges of a 
visible object or of its surfaces, and also the positions of separate objects 
relative to one another (all of which fall under order) are perceived from the 
positions of their forms on the eye’s surface and from distinguishing the parts 
of the object’s form [1 1 8]. Sight perceives the relative positions of the parts of 
a visible object in the near-far direction from the magnitude of their distances 
[119]. Sight perceives the positions of the parts of an object’s surface with 


c 


Introduction 


VIII. Synopsis. Book II 


ci 


regard to their different locations, separation and contiguity from perceiving 
the parts of the form in the eye [120]. 

Perception of solidity [121—126]: Sight perceives solidity, i.e. the extension of 
bodies in the three dimensions, from perceiving the surfaces of bodies and 
their intersection [121-122]. Perception of solidity in a body whose convex 
surface faces the eye [123]. Perception of solidity in a body which has a 
concave surface [124]. Sight perceives the solidity of bodies from perceiving 
the bending of their surfaces from moderate distances [125-126]. 

Perception of shape [127- 134]: Shape is either the shape of the periphery of an 
object or of a part of its surface, or the shape of a solid object or part, the latter 
being the figure of an object’s surface or part [127]. How the sentient perceives 
the shape of the object’s periphery [128]. Sight perceives the figure of an 
object’s surface from the orientation of the object’s surfaces [129-133]. 

Perception of concavity of a surface [130]. Perception of convexity of a surface 
[132]. How the sentient ascertains the figure of an object’s surface or of an 
object’s part [133]. Summary [134]. 

Perception of size [135-171]: Most mathematicians assume that the size or 
magnitude of a visible object is perceived from the size of the angle produced 
at the centre of the eye, but some hold that such perception also takes account 
of the object’s distance and position [135]. Size cannot be perceived by 
estimating the angles alone — experimental demonstration [136-140]. 

Determination of how size is perceived [141-148], The basis on which the 
faculty ofjudgement relies for discerning the size of a visible object is the part 
of the eye in which the object’s form occurs and the angle subtended by this 
part at the eye’s centre [141]. But the faculty ofjudgement is not content to 
consider this angle and this part [ 1 42] but considers both the angle and distance 
[143]. The faculty ofjudgement realizes that the radial lines get farther apart as 
they recede from the eye, and from this it perceives the object’s size when it 
perceives the size of the angle and the lengths of those lines [144]. The sentient 
and the discerning faculty perceive the lines and the size of the part of the eye in 
which the form occurs [145]. Sight, at the moment of vision, has either a sure 
or a conjectural perception of the object, and accordingly the faculty of 
judgement’s perception of the object’s size is either certain or conjectural 1 

[146]. A manifest proof that perception of size depends on considering the 
object’s distance [147-148]. 

Sight is accustomed to judge the distances of objects — the manner of 
perceiving the magnitude of distances that extend alongside successive and 
connected bodies [149]. Manner of perceiving the distances of familiar visible 


objects [150]. How the sentient begins to perceive the size of parts of the 
ground extending between it and visible objects [1 5 1-1 55]. 

Visible properties are ascertained by repeated looks and contemplation and 
judgement — distance is ascertained by these means [156]. Sight cannot 
ascertain the magnitude of immoderate distances [157-158]. The sentient is 
aware of whether the magnitude of a distance is certain or uncertain, and 
similarly with its perception of forms [159]. Sight ascertains the size of an 
object by ascertaining the magnitude of its distance — moderate distances 
vary with conditions of the visible object [160]. The sentient may conjecture 
the magnitude of an object’s distance from the size of the angle subtended by 
the object in the eye — this happens when it perceives the size of familiar 
objects by recognition [161]. Sight may infer the magnitude of distances of 
unfamiliar objects by assimilating the magnitudes of unfamiliar objects to 
those of familiar ones [162]. 

The ways in which different kinds of magnitude are perceived by sight [163-170]: 
The kinds of magnitude which are perceptible upon facing a visible object; 
sight perceives solidity only through movement [163]. Sight’s perception of 
magnitudes is ascertained or conjectural according as their distances from the 
eye are ascertained or conjectured — the sentient ascertains an object’s size and 
distance by moving the radial axis over their parts [164]. The axis moves by 
moving the whole eye [165]. How sight contemplates an object by this 
movement and how it ascertains the object’s size by means of contemplation 
[166-167]. Sight perceives the inclination of surfaces (and of spatial intervals) 
or their frontality from perceiving the lengths of the radial lines [168]. The 
magnitude of the largest moderate distance for a given visible object depends 
on the object’s inclination or frontality relative to the eye [169]. Summary 
[170]. The reason why an excessively distant object is seen to be smaller than it 
truly is will be shown in the discussion of visual errors, i.e. in Book III [1 71]. 

Perception of separation [172— 174]: Sight perceives the separation of objects 
from perceiving the separation of their forms. Enumeration of the conditions 
from which sight infers the separation of objects [172]. Separation of con- 
tiguous and non-contiguous bodies [173]. Perception of wide and narrow 
gaps [174]. 

Perception of continuity [175-176] is due to perception of the absence of 
separation [175]. Perception of contiguity [176]. 

Perception of number is by inference from numerable, separate objects [177]. 


cii Introduction 

Perception of motion [178-187]: Motion is perceived from comparing the 
moving body with other visible objects [178]. Motion is perceived from 
comparing the moving object with several visible objects, or with a single 
object, or with the eye. Demonstration of the first two cases [179]. How the 
moving visible object is compared with the eye [180]. Sight may perceive 
motion in any one of these ways even when it is itself in motion [181]. How 
sight perceives locomotion and movement of rotation [182]. Perception of a 
motion compounded of rotation and locomotion [183]. Perception of motion 
occupies an interval of time [184]. This interval is sensible [185]. Summing up 
all that has been shown regarding visual perception of motion [186-187]. 

Perception of rest is due to perceiving an object at the same place and in the 
same position during a sensible interval of time [188]. 

Perception of roughness [189-191]: In most cases roughness is perceived from 
the form which appears in the surface of the rough body [189]. Perception of 
excessively rough surfaces [190]. Excessive roughness is perceived from the 
varied forms of light which make visible the separation of parts and their 
different positions [191]. 

Perception of smoothness [192-194]: Sight perceives smoothness from the 
form of light in the surface of the smooth body [192]. Polish, or extreme 
smoothness, is perceived from the glitter and shine of light [193]. Smoothness 
and roughness may coexist in one surface [194]. 

Perception of transparency [195-196]: Sight perceives transparency by infer- 
ence from what it sees behind the transparent body — transparency of a body 
is perceptible only if the body has some opacity in it and is denser than the air 
extending between it and the eye [195]. Perception of transparency when there 
is behind the transparent body an opaque body the colour of which is seen to 
be different from that of the transparent body [196]. 

Opacity is perceived from the absence of transparency [197]. 

Shadow is perceived from comparison with neighbouring illuminations or 
with previously experienced illuminations [198]. 

Darkness is perceived by inference from the absence of light [199]. 

Perception of beauty [200-231]: Sight perceives beauty from the particular 
visible properties in isolation and in conjunction [200]. The cause of beauty is 


VIII. Synopsis. Book. II ciii 

either a single property, a number of particular properties, a conjunction of 
properties or a harmonious composition of them [201]. The particular 
properties that produce beauty singly: light [202], colour [203], distance [204], 
position [205], solidity [206], shape [207], size [208], separation [209], conti- 
nuity [210], number [21 1], movement [212], rest [213], roughness [214], 
smoothness [215], transparency [216], opacity [217], shadow [218], darkness 
[219], similarity [220], and dissimilarity [221]. These properties do not 
produce beauty in all circumstances or in all forms [222]. 

The particular properties may produce beauty by being in conjunction with 
one another [223-225]. The beauty of a script (for example) is due to the 
conjunction of shape and position [223]. Other examples of beauty being 
produced by the conjunction of particular properties [224]. Most instances of 
beauty are due to the conjunction of particular properties [225]. 

Beauty may consist of proportionality and harmony and this differs from 
the beauty of single or conjoined properties [226-227]. Proportionality by 
itself produces beauty [228-230]. Summary and conclusion [231]. 

Ugliness is perceived from the forms that lack all beautiful properties [232]. 

Similarity is perceived from the similarity of two forms or properties in 
respect of what they have in common [233]. 

Dissimilarity is perceived by comparing two different forms and perceiving 
their lack of identity [234]. Conclusion [235]. 

CHAPTER 4 

ON DISTINGUISHING [THE WAYS IN WHICH] 

SIGHT PERCEIVES VISIBLE OBJECTS 

II, 4 [1-36] 

Sight perceives in the forms of visible objects a number of particular proper- 
ties together, then by discerning the properties it perceives each of them singly 
[1]. Some particular properties appear at the moment of glancing at the object, 
and others appear only after scrutiny and contemplation [2]. Sight ascertains 
the true form of an object only after scrutinizing it [3]. The true forms of 
visible objects can be perceived only by contemplation [4]. Perception of 
visible objects is therefore either by glancing or by contemplation [5]. 
Contemplation is achieved by the eye and by discernment [6]. How the 
sentient contemplates a large object [7]. The faculty of judgement discerns all 
the forms it receives, while the eye naturally performs the movement of 
contemplation [8]. Similarly, sight achieves contemplation of an extremely 


civ Introduction 

small object only by passing the visual axis over it [9]. How the sentient 
ascertains the form of a visible object by means of contemplation and 
movement [10-1 1]. 

Perceived forms of visible objects remain in the imagination — memory is 
the proof of this [12]. Repeatedly received and better ascertained forms are 
more firmly fixed in the imagination [13-14]. Evidence furnished by what one 
does to memorize a piece of scientific, literary or historical writing [15]. 

How the universal forms of species of visible objects are formed in the 
imagination [16]. The sentient recognizes a visible object by comparing the 
actually seen form with the universal form that has been fixed in the 
imagination, and this is how the quiddity of an object is perceived [17]. 

Contemplative vision is achieved either by mere contemplation or by 
contemplation accompanied by knowledge — the former occurs in the 
perception of unfamiliar or unmemorized objects [18]. Perception by con- 
templation together with prior knowledge is perception of all species of 
objects previously seen and currently memorized, provided that the objects 
are again contemplated while being recognized — recognition is of a species or 
of an individual or of both [19]. 

Perception by contemplation takes place in an interval of time which may 
be shortened when prior knowledge is involved [20-21]. Objects previously 
seen, the forms of which are recognized and remembered, may be perceived 
by signs. Sight perceives familiar objects and their quiddities by signs and 
prior knowledge [22]. The time required for perceiving the specific nature of 
an object is shorter than that required for perceiving the object’s individuality 
[23]. The specific natures of familiar objects are perceived in times of variable 
length [24-25]. Summary [26]. The time required for contemplation also 
varies with the contemplated properties [27-28]. 

Visual perception through knowledge, when achieved by means of signs 
and brief contemplation, does not result in ascertained perception [29-32]. 

Vision by glancing, which is perception of the manifest properties of an 
object, is achieved either by glancing alone or by glancing accompanied by 
prior knowledge [33]. Contemplative vision, which is vision of objects not 
previously seen or not currently remembered, is achieved by contemplation 
alone or by contemplation together with prior knowledge [34]. In general, 
ascertained visual perception is achieved only by contemplating all properties 
of the visible object [3 5]. Conclusion [36]. 


VIII. Synopsis. Book III cv 

BOOK III 

ON ERRORS OF DIRECT VISION 
AND THEIR CAUSES 


CHAPTER I 
PREFACE 

III, I [1-3] 

Sight does not always perceive its objects as they truly are and it may not be 
aware of its error [1-2]. The object of Book III is to show the various kinds of 
error in what is seen rectilinearly, their causes and the manner of their 
occurrence [3]. 


CHAPTER 2 

ON WHAT NEEDS TO BE ADVANCED FOR CLARIFYING THE 
DISCUSSION ON ERRORS OF SIGHT 

III, 2 [1-86] 

Introductory [1]. How a single object is seen as one by both eyes at once 
[2-16]. Both eyes perform the same actions in vision [2-3]. The point on the 
visible object on which the visual axes meet is similarly situated with respect 
to both eyes [4-7]. Again, if the object is small, its form will occur in two 
similarly situated places in the eyes [8]. The two axes may meet on one object 
while the two eyes perceive another object the position of which differs in 
direction with respect to both eyes [9]. Conclusion [10]. 

The lines reaching from the two holes in the bones (cranium apertures) to 
the middle of the common nerve are similarly situated with respect to the line 
joining the centres of the holes [11]. The common axis, viz. the straight line 
extending from the middle of the common nerve to the middle of the line 
joining the two holes in the bones and perpendicular to it, is a fixed line [12]. 
Effect of the position of the visual axes when they meet at a point on the 
common nerve [13]. The forms that occur at the intersections of both visual 
axes with the surfaces of the eyes will proceed to a point on the common axis 
in the middle of the common nerve [14]. And that is the way in which the two 
forms of the object in the eyes coincide in the common nerve [15]. Conclusion 
[16]. 

The point where the visual axes meet on the common axis inside the 
common nerve is called ‘the Centre’ [17]. The forms that occur in the eyes for 
an object located on the common axis are more alike than the forms corres- 
ponding to an object outside that axis [18]. The form in the common nerve 



CVI 


Introduction 


evil 


corresponding to an object situated far from the common axis is single but 
unclear, provided that the visual axes meet on that object [19]. The reason 
why the borders of a large object are unclear when the visual axes are fixed at a 
point in it [20]. Blurring of the forms of visible objects is due to difference in 
position of the rays reaching them [21]. 

An object will produce two forms in the common nerve if it lies between the 
visual axes at a point closer to or farther from the eye than the object on which 
the axes meet [22]. A double form will also be produced if the visible object 
lies on one axis and outside the other [23]. Conclusion [24]. 

Experimental examination of the preceding notions by means of a board 
and movable objects [25-47]. Summary of the results of the preceding 
examination [48]. The reason why familiar objects are each usually seen single 
[49]. Conclusion [50]. Resumption of the experiments by considering the 
diagonals (‘diameters’) on the board [51-54]. Experiment with strips of paper 
[55-60]. Results [61]. Experiment with a frontally oriented or oblique paper 
[62-65]. Results [66]. Experiment with paper and object [67-70]. Results [71]. 
Experiment with paper, object and strips [72-78]. Results [79]. 

The reason why a frontally oriented object is distinct but not an excessively 
inclined one [80-85]. Transition [86]. 

CHAPTER 3 

ON THE CAUSES OF ERRORS OF SIGHT 

HI, 3 [1-34] 

Summary of what has been shown in Books I and II with regard to conditions 
of vision [1-2]. Soundness of the eye is also a condition of correct vision [3]. 
Summary of what has been shown in the preceding chapter regarding 
conditions of distinct vision [4]. The conditions of achieving veridical vision 
are eight in number [5]. Each of these conditions has a certain latitude or range 
(called ‘range of moderateness’) within which sight is capable of perceiving its 
object as it is — application of this notion to distance [6]. Application to 
obliquely oriented objects [7]. Application to light [8]. Application to size [9]. 
Application to transparency and opacity [10]. Application to movement 
[11-12]. Application to sound and impaired sight [13]. Summary [14]. 

Definition of ‘range of moderateness’ — its limits vary with visible objects 
[15]. How the moderate range for distance varies with properties of the object 
— colour [16], fine detail [17], position relative to the visual axis [18], 
luminosity [19], size [20], opacity [21], transparency of the air [22], duration 
of perception [23] and soundness of the eye [24]. Conclusion [25]. And 
similarly for position [26], luminosity [27], size [28], opacity [29], transpar- 
ency [30], duration [31] and soundness of the eye [32]. Summary [33]. All 


VIII. Synopsis. Book III 

errors of sight occur when the conditions for veridical vision fall outside the 
limits of moderateness [34]. 

CHAPTER 4 

ON DISTINGUISHING ERRORS OF SIGHT 
HI* 4 [ I — 9] 

Errors of vision are of three kinds: errors in pure sensation, in recognition and 
in inference [1-4]. Examples of errors in pure sensation [5], in recognition [6] 
and in inference and judgement [7-8]. Conclusion [9]. 


chapter 5 

ON THE WAYS IN WHICH SIGHT ERRS 
IN PURE SENSATION 
lib 5 [ 1 — 1 5] 

Error in pure sensation relates to light qua light and colour qua colour, as well 
as to variation of light and colour in respect of strength and weakness, and 
may arise in regard to differences and number of colours [1-3]. How error in 
pure sensation depends on each of the previously detailed causes [4-14]. Error 
in pure sensation when the object’s distance from the eye falls outside the 
moderate range [4], and its cause [5-6]. Error in pure sensation when the 
following fall outside the moderate range: the object’s position [7], or 
illumination [8], or size [9], or opacity [10], or the transparency of the 
intervening air [1 1], or the time during which the object is perceived [12]. The 
reason why sight is not able to perceive differences of colour when the object is 
placed in a dark place [13]. Error of sight in pure sensation when the condition 
of sight itself falls outside the moderate range [14]. Conclusion [15]. 


CHAPTER 6 

ON THE WAYS IN WHICH SIGHT ERRS 
IN RECOGNITION 

III, 6 [i — 3 1 ] 

Error of sight in regard to an object’s quiddity is error in recognition — 
recognition is either of an individual or of a species or of both at once [1]. Sight 
is accustomed to compare forms and properties with the similar ones it has 
known [2]. Error in recognition occurs when sight is unable to achieve a 
correct perception of the object, that is when one or more of the properties 


cviii Introduction 

without which the object cannot be correctly perceived fall outside the 
moderate range [3]. 

The ways in which errors in recognition depend on each of the causes of 
visual error [4-31]. Sight’s error in recognition when the object’s distance 
from the eye falls outside the moderate range [4]. Common occurrence of this 
kind of error [5]. Error may occur in regard to an object’s specific nature 
because of excessively far distance [6]. A distance that falls outside the 
moderate range may also occasion error in regard to unfamiliar properties in 
the object [7]. Error in recognition when the object’s position falls outside the 
moderate range [8], and its cause [9]. Error in recognition in regard to an 
object’s specific nature when the object’s orientation falls outside the moderate 
range [10]. Error in regard to an object’s specific nature when the object’s 
illumination falls outside the moderate range [11-12], and its cause [13]. Error 
in recognition when the object’s size falls outside the moderate range [14], and 
its cause [15]. Error in recognition when the object’s opacity falls outside the 
moderate range [16], and its cause [17]. Error in recognition when the 
transparency of the intervening air falls outside the moderate range [18], and 
its cause [19]. The reason why the colour of an object appears mixed with the 
colour of a transparent cloth through which it is viewed [20-22]. Error in 
perceiving the image appearing on the back side of a curtain [23], and the 
reason for mistaking its nature [24]. Error in recognition when the duration of 
perception falls short of the moderate range [25], and its cause [26]. Error in 
recognition when the condition of sight itself falls outside the moderate range, 
and its cause [27-30]. Conclusion [31]. 


chapter 7 

ON THE WAYS IN WHICH SIGHT ERRS 
IN INFERENCE 

III, 7 [1-288] 

Categories of visual error in inference [1]. 

(A) Inferential errors in regard to the following properties of a visible object 
when the object’s distance falls outside the moderate range [2-62]; magnitude 
of distance [2-3], position [4-7], solidity or shape of the object’s whole surface 
[8-10], shape of facing surface [11-12], size [i 3 ~ 2 S]y separation [26-28], 
continuity [29-30], number [31], movement [32-33], rest [34-38], roughness 
[39*“43]> smoothness [44-4$], transparency [46-47L opacity [48-49], shadow 
[50-51], darkness [52-53], beauty [54-55], ugliness [56-57], similarity 
[58-59], dissimilarity [60-61]. Conclusion [62]. 


VIII. Synopsis. Book III cix 

(B) Inferential errors in regard to the following properties of a visible object 
when the object’s position falls outside the moderate range [63-103]: magni- 
tude of distance [63-64], position [65-66], shape [67-70], size [71-74], separ- 
ation [75-76], continuity [77-78], number [79-80], movement [81-82], rest 
[83-84], roughness [85-86], smoothness [87-88], transparency and opacity 
[89-91], shadow [92-93], darkness [94-95], beauty [96-97], ugliness 
[98-99], similarity [100-101], dissimilarity [102]. Conclusion [103]. 

(C) Inferential errors in regard to the following properties of a visible object 
when the object’s illumination falls outside the moderate range [104-130]: 
magnitude of distance [1 04-1 05], position [106], shape [1 07-1 09], size 
[no-in], separation, continuity and number [112-115], movement [116], 
rest [117], roughness, smoothness, transparency and opacity [118-120], 
shadow and darkness [121-123], beauty and ugliness [124-126], similarity and 
dissimilarity [127-129]. Conclusion [130]. 

(D) Inferential errors in regard to the following properties of a visible object 
when the object’s size falls outside the moderate range [131-162]: magnitude 
of distance [131-133], position [134-136], shape [137—1 39], size [140-141], 
separation, continuity and number [142- 144], movement [145-146], rest 
[147-148], roughness and smoothness [149-150], transparency and opacity 
[15 1 — 1 53], shadow and darkness [154-155], beauty and ugliness [156-158], 
similarity and dissimilarity [159—161]. Conclusion [162]. 

(E) Inferential errors in regard to the following properties of a visible object 
when the object’s opacity falls outside the moderate range [163-192]: magni- 
tude of distance and position [163], shape [164], size [165], separation, 
continuity and number [166-169], movement and rest [170-172], roughness 
and smoothness [173-174], transparency and opacity [175-177], shadow 
[178-179], darkness [180-184], beauty and ugliness [185-188], similarity and 
dissimilarity [189-191]. Conclusion [192]. 

(F) Inferential errors in regard to the following properties of a visible object 
when the transparency of the air falls outside the moderate range [193-216]: 
magnitude of distance [193-194], position [195], shape [196], size [197], 
separation, continuity and number [198-199], (error in regard to all preceding 
properties when a thick smoke fills the air [200-201]), movement [202-203], 
rest [204-205], roughness, smoothness, transparency, opacity, shadow and 
darkness [206-210], beauty, ugliness, similarity and dissimilarity [211-215]. 
Conclusion [216]. 

(G) Inferential errors in regard to the following properties of a visible object 
when the duration of perception falls short of the moderate range [217-249]: 
magnitude of distance [217], position [218-220], shape [221], size [222-225], 
separation, .continuity and number [226-229], movement [230-231], rest 
[232-236], roughness and smoothness [237-238], transparency and opacity 


cx 


Introduction 


[239-240], shadow and darkness [241-243], beauty, ugliness, similarity and 
dissimilarity [244-248]. Conclusion [249]. 

(H) Inferential errors in regard to the following properties of a visible object 
when the condition of sight falls outside the moderate range [250-277]: magni- 
tude of distance [250-253], position [254-255], shape [256], separation and 
continuity [257], number [258-260], movement [261-263], rest [264-266], 
roughness, smoothness, transparency and opacity [267-271], shadow and 
darkness [272-274], beauty, ugliness, similarity and dissimilarity [275-277]. 
Conclusion [278]. 

Summing up the discussion of visual errors [279-288]. 


COMMENTARY 


NOTE ON THE COMMENTARY 

One main purpose of the following commentary is to reduce the inevitable refractory 
effect of the English translation and thus to bring the reader closer to the author’s 
intentions. As everyone knows, a translation always involves a certain amount of 
interpretation; and while it is true that a commentary is bound to add still more 
interpretations, it can also make explicit some of the problems faced by the translator, 
and in this way serve as a warning to the reader or even as a guide. Hence the emphasis 
laid on questions of terminology in many of the following notes and comments. 

In a large number of notes, especially those for Books I and II, of which the Latin 
translation is literal for the most part, I have frequently quoted Latin expressions in 
juxtaposition with their Arabic equivalents. This is but a reflection of my concern for 
the interests of the Latin medievalist and, in general, for the historian who wishes to 
pursue the European career of the Optics — a concern which shows itself also in the 
Arabic-Latin Concordance and Glossaries. Nothing short of a critical edition of the 
entire Latin text, of course, can fully satisfy the medievalist’s needs. Hopefully 
someone will some day undertake that arduous but, I believe, worthwhile task. I 
should add that my citations from ‘the Latin text’ are always from Risner’s 1572 
edition which I have compared only occasionally with the two manuscripts specified. 

To make clear I. H. ’s position on certain points, or to identify his sources or what I 
take to be his problem situation, I have referred to earlier Greek and Arabic authors, 
especially to Ptolemy whose influence on I. H.’s book was far greater than that of any 
other philosopher. But the Optics is a long and varied treatise, and to write a complete, 
running commentary on the main scientific, historical and philosophical questions it 
raises would have been simply unrealizable within the scope of the present publi- 
cation. Indeed it should be evident that a full understanding of these questions is a 
never-ending process — one that will require us to look all the way back to the early 
Greek philosophers and all the way forward to Helmholtz. My edition and translation 
will have served their purpose if they prove to be of help to Arabists and non-Arabists 
in their effort towards that goal. 


A. I. S. 


2 


Commentary 


SIGLA USED IN THE COMMENTARY 

For other abbreviations , see Bibliography 

A r Bk I in the 'Askari copy of Kitab al-Manazir — MS Fatih 3212. 

A, Bk II in the 'Askari copy of Kitab al-Manazir = MS Fatih 3213. 

A 3 Bk III in the 'Askari copy of Kitab al-Mandzir = MS Fatih 3214. 

Bibl. Bibliography at the end of this volume. 

E Edition of the Arabic text of Kitab al-Mana^ir, Bks I— III. References 

are by page and line ( e.g . E 123:14). 

L t Latin translation of Kitab al-Mandzir in MSCR3.3 at the Royal 

Observatory, Edinburgh. 

L 2 Latin translation of Kitab al-Mandzir in MS Royal 12.G. VII at the 

British Library, London. 

M MS Ahmet III 3339: Bks I— III of Kitab al-Mandzir. 

R Risner’s edition of the Latin version of Kitab al-Mandzir. References 

are by page and line (e.g. R 29:52). 

S MS Ayasofya 2448: Bks I— VII of Kitab al-Mana%ir. 

Cross-references to the English text of the Optics within the same chapter 
are by paragraph numbers only, e.g. [81]. All other cross-references are by 
Book, chapter and paragraph numbers, e.g. II, 3 [81]. These numbers are the 
same as for the Arabic edition. 

Paragraph numbers in square brackets are sometimes followed by Arabic 
numerals. These refer to similarly marked words and expressions in the text of 
the English translation. 

Ptolemaei Optica (abbreviated Ptol. Opt.) is cited by Book and paragraph 
(e.g. II, 22) or by page and line (e.g. 22:9) 

As in the Introduction, Ibn al-Haytham’s name is abbreviated as ‘I. H.\ 




BOOK I 


CHAPTER I 

[1] Adverse conditions for scientific discovery. No one can fail to be impressed 
by this opening paragraph, or, indeed, by the whole Preface. I. H.’s brave 
affirmations of the non-manifestness of truth, the cloudy nature of the human 
mind, the absence of a charted path for scientific inquiry and the inherent 
fallibility of the inquirer — these are all remarkable for their maturity and 
sophistication. I. H. was an optimist who believed that scientific truth could 
and would be discovered, but he was not a naive optimist, unaware of the 
pitfalls that lie on the way to scientific discovery. He advanced similar ideas in 
the Dubitationes in Ptolemaeum where he stresses the need for criticism in 
scientific investigation. That treatise, composed after the Optics (see above, 
Introduction, sec. II), opens with the following lines: 

Truth is sought for itself; and in seeking that which is sought for itself one is only 
concerned to find it. To find the truth is hard and the way to it rough. For the truths 
are immersed in uncertainties, and all men are naturally inclined to have faith in the 
scientists. Thus when a man looks into the writings of scientists and, following his 
natural inclination, confines himself to grasping their pronouncements and inten- 
tions, the truth [for him] will consist of their intended notions and their indicated 
goals. But God has not protected scientists from error, nor has He made their 
science immune from shortcomings and defects. Had this not been the case, they 
would not have disagreed about anything in the sciences, nor would their opinions 
have differed in regard to the true nature of things. But the facts are otherwise. The 
seeker after the truth is, therefore, not he who studies the writings of the ancients 
and, following his natural disposition, puts his trust in them, but rather the one who 
suspects his faith in them and questions what he gathers from them, the one who 
submits to argument and demonstration, and not to the sayings of a human being 
whose nature is fraught with all kinds of imperfection and deficiency. It is thus the 
duty of the man who studies the writings of scientists, if learning the truth is his 
goal, to make himself an enemy of all that he reads, and, applying his mind to the 
core and margins of its content, attack it from every side. He should also suspect 
himself as he performs his critical examination of it, so that he may avoid falling 
into either prejudice or leniency. If he follows this path the truths will be revealed to 
him, and whatever shortcomings or uncertainties may exist in the discourse of 
those who came before him will become manifest ( al-Shukuk 'ala Batlamyus, 

pp. 3-4). 

The Dubitationes contained the first substantial criticism of the models pro- 
posed in Ptolemy’s Almagest and Planetary Hypotheses for the explanation ot 


8 


4 


Commentary 


5 


planetary motions, but did not offer any alternative arrangements for the orbs 
and spheres associated with those motions. That task was undertaken, to a 
considerable extent under I. H.’s influence, by Islamic astronomers in the 
thirteenth and later centuries. The Optics , by contrast, was not a critique of 
earlier views but rather a positive construction of a new theory. Both Optics and 
Dubitationes , however, were animated by the same conviction, namely the 
conviction that a viable theory, whether of celestial or optical phenomena, must 
satisfy the requirements ofboth physics and mathematics (see following note) . 

[2] Optics as a composite science. The assertion is made in this paragraph that 
inquiry into the subject of vision combines (or, is composed of: murakkab min) 
the natural and the mathematical sciences. Two reasons are given here for this 
dependence ( ta'alluq ) of optics on physics and mathematics: (1) that vision is 
the activity of one of the senses and these are among the natural things (al-umur 
al-tabT'iyya ), and (2) that the faculty of sight, in addition to being ‘character- 
ized by straight lines’, perceives properties such as shape, position and 
magnitude, which are objects of mathematical investigation. 

The idea of combination, composition or synthesis (tarkTb) occurs in two 
other optical works by I. H., where it is expressed in somewhat different 
terms. In On the Rainbow and the Halo (completed in Rajab, 419/1028) I. H. 
wrote: 

Everything whose nature (haqtqa) is made subject of inquiry must be investigated in 
a manner ( nahw ) conformable ( mujanis ) to its kind (naw'): if the thing is simple 
(basit), then (it must be investigated) by a simple reasoning ( nazar ), and if compo- 
site, then by a composite reasoning. Now among the things which men have 
aspired to know about, and which have given rise to much perplexity of thought 
[and contrary opinions regarding the conditions of their existence], are the two 
effects known as the halo and the rainbow. These effects always exist in dense air 
and always maintain a regular shape. As for the halo, it always has the shape of a 
circle, unless something interferes with it that alters it. The rainbow, on the other 
hand, always has the shape of a section (qit'a) of a circle. Thus, since their 
substratum is air their investigation (nazar) must be physical, and since they have a 
round shape they must also be investigated mathematically. That is why the inquiry 
(nazar) by means of which the nature of these two effects is investigated comes to be 
composed of a physical and a mathematical (examination). Let us then investigate 
their nature in a manner which satisfies the requirements of physical matters, a 
manner which, moreover, accords with what is found to exist regarding these two 
effects (quoted by Kamal al-DIn, Tanqih , n, p. 259; bracketed words added from 
Berlin MS or. oct. 2970, fol. 106b). 

Again, the Discourse on Light , written after the Optics , opens with the 
following statement: 


I. i [2] 

Discussion of the nature (mahiyya) of light belongs to the natural sciences, and 
discussion of the manner (kayfiyya) of radiation of light depends (muhtaj) upon the 
mathematical sciences on account of the lines on which the lights extend. Again, 
discussion of the nature of the ray belongs to the natural sciences, and discussion of 
its shape (shakl) and structure (hay 'a) belongs to the mathematical sciences. And 
similarly with regard to the transparent bodies through which the lights pass: 
discussion of the nature of their transparency belongs to the natural sciences, and 
discussion of how (kayfiyya) light extends through them belongs to the mathemat- 
ical sciences. Therefore, the discussion of light and of the ray and of transparency 
must be composed of (yajibu an yakuna murakkaban min) the natural and the 
mathematical sciences (Qawl fi al-Daw’, in Rasa 3 il, p. 2). 

Thus, in the Optics , ‘vision’ is the principal term with reference to which the 
idea of tarkxb is introduced: optics is a composite science because it is concerned 
with a natural faculty of cognition whose objects are endowed with geometrical 
properties such as shape and magnitude, and whose operation involves the 
mediation of straight lines. The passage from On the Rainbow and the Halo , 
though not concerned with vision, does not depart significantly from the 
explanation given in the Optics , the argument of this passage being that the 
synthetic character of the study of the phenomena in question follows their 
synthetic nature. The Discourse appears to be saying something quite different 
from either of these two works: it is not so much the heterogeneous character 
of the subject-matter that determines the synthetic character of optics, but the 
fact that it is a science concerned both with the nature and the mode of behaviour 
of light, the ray and transparency. 

The recognition that the study of vision included physical as well as 
mathematical notions can be traced back to Aristotle, who, in a well-known 
passage in the Physics , listed optics among ‘the more physical of the math- 
ematical sciences’ (ta physikotera ton mathematon), the other items in the list 
being astronomy and harmonics (i93 b 22-i94 a 8), and also mechanics (Posterior 
Analytics , 76 a 22“5, 78^7-9). Al-Kindl was probably echoing the Aristotelian 
view when he wrote in the first paragraph of De aspectibus that his geometrical 
demonstrations would proceed in accordance with the requirements of 
physical things: 

Oportet, postquam optamus complere artes doctrinales [i.e. the mathematical 
sciences], et exponere in eo, quod antiqui praemiserunt nobis de eis, et augere, quod 
inceperunt et in quibus fuerunt nobis occasiones adhipiscendi uniuersas bonitates 
animales, ut de diuersitatibus aspectus secundum nostrae possibilitatis mensuram 
uniuersaliter et demonstratiue loquamur, et nostrorum sermonum de his principia 
ex rebus naturalibus ponamus, eo quod aspectus, quo singularia comprehenduntur 
diuersa, sit unus ex sensibus, quatenus nobis declaretur, qualiter uisibilia compre- 
henduntur. Postea uero principia geometrica, quae nobis erunt demonstradonum 
geometricarum principia, erunt a naturalibus secunda, licet quantum ad nos fuerint 


6 Commentary 

prima, ne nostrarum demonstrationum principia sint, sicut relationes non 
nacuraliter positae. Sic enim sermones nostri essent fabulosi, demonstrationis uiam 
egredientes (Alkindi, De aspectibus , in Bjdrnbo and Vogl, eds., Drei optische Werke , 
p. 3. For the suggested translation of artes doctrinales as ‘mathematical sciences’ see 
Gerard of Cremona’s translation of Alfarabi’s De scientiis , where scientia doctrinarum 
corresponds to 'ilm al-ta'allm , science of mathematics (Alfarabi, Catalogo de las 
ciencias , ed. Palencia, 1932, p. 145]. Talim y which means teaching, was used as 
equivalent to mathema , and the plural ta'dlim in the sense of mathemata , the 
mathematical sciences. Gerard was the translator of De aspectibus.). 

That certain disciplines, such as those mentioned by Aristotle, conjoin 
physical and mathematical principles is an observation which we find 
expressed in Arabic writers before and after I. H. (In the case of al-Kindi it is to 
be noted that the role of physical considerations is accepted by one who 
adhered to the ‘mathematical’ theory of visual rays and who rejected the 
Aristotelian account of vision in terms of forms received in the eye [De 
aspectibus , pp. 9 ff].) What is distinctive about I. H., however, is his use of the 
idea of synthesis to characterize this conjunction. Averroes, who considered 
himself a faithful follower of Aristotle, objected to this idea when he encoun- 
tered it (probably) in I. H. ’s treatise On the Rainbow and the Halo. He preferred 
to describe the use of mathematics in the explanation of rainbow phenomena 
in terms of the subordination rather than composition of disciplines; theorems 
proved in mathematics (in this case, geometry), he believed, may function 
only as postulates or hypotheses in what should still be considered essentially a 
physical inquiry: 

Et quia subiectum istorum signorum [i.e. the halo and the rainbow] sunt corpora 
naturalia, et, cum hoc, ipsa accidunt in situ determinate et in figuris determinatis, 
necessarium est, ut sit investigatio de eis secundum unum modum Naturalis, 
secundum alium Mathematica. Nos autem consideremus hoc de dispositione 
istorum de eis, de quibus considerat Naturalis, utendo illis rebus, quae declaratae 
sunt in Mathematicis, tanquam suppositionibus, et fundamentis positis, et maxime 
eis, de quorum consuetudine est ut accipiantur hie principia directionis. . . . Et has 
omnes res quas dixi, iam declaravit eas Avenetan [i.e. Ibn al-Haytham] in tractatu 
famoso, sed ista ut diximus non sunt de hac scientia, sed sunt de scientia Perspec- 
tiva; et ideo non curavit Aristoteles de istis hie, et fuit sibi suffuciens de eo, quod 
pertinet huic scientiae, considerare. Et ille qui congregavit has duas speculationes 
iam erravit, ut fecit Avenetan; nam speculatio de hoc est duarum diversarum 
artium; neque ingreditur id, quod declaratum est de hoc scientia perspectiva in hac 
scientia, ita quod haec scientia considerat de his causis alio modo, et facit ipsas 
principia demonstrations (Averrois in Libros Meteorologicorum Expositio media , 
Venice, 1562; repr. in Aristotelis Opera cum Averrois Commentariis , vol. v, Frankfurt- 
am-Main, 1962, pp. 448 v L, 445 v E-L). 


I- I [3] 7 

This may appear no more than an apologetic justification by Averroes of the 
possible fact that his copy of Aristotle’s Meteorology , like the Arabic copies 
now extant, lacked the mathematical treatment of the rainbow which we find 
in the Greek text. It will, therefore, be relevant, as well as interesting, to note 
that he expressed a similarly antagonistic attitude towards al-Kindf s theo- 
rizing about compound medicines in mathematico-physical terms. In his 
Kitab aUKulliyyat (the Latin Colliget) Averroes assails ‘the man known as 
al-Kindf for having written ‘a treatise in which he set out to discourse on the 
rules (qawdnin) for discovering the nature of a compound medicine (in a 
manner] that involves the arts of arithmetic and music, in the way that 
happens to someone who investigates a thing accidentally . . .’ The degree of 
Averroes’ antagonism to al-Kindf s approach in his treatise (obviously al- 
Kindf s Kitab fi Ma e rifat quwa al-adwiya al-murakkaba) is sufficiently revealed in 
the use of expressions like ‘nonsensical’, ‘absurd’ and the ‘worst confusion’ 
that could have happened in the art of medicine (see Quitab el Culiat , Larache, 
Morocco, 1939, p. 168, 11. 7-1 1 and 18-20). The above passage reads as 
follows in an edition by M. R. McVaugh of a section of the Colliget : ‘Et posuit 
hunc errorem homo qui dicitur Alkindus, quia ipse fecit unam compilationem 
tractatuum et credidit in illis dare cognosci naturam medicinarum composi- 
tarum, et voluit hoc demonstrare per artem alhabachi vel algorismi et musice, 
sicut facit ille qui speculatur res per accidens’ (McVaugh, Arnaldi de Villanova 
Opera Medica Omnia , 11, p. 323). The Arabic text of al-Kindf s treatise has been 
published with a French translation by L. Gauthier — see Bibliography. 

Unfortunately, I. H. does not elucidate the concept of tarkib any further 
than he does in the passages quoted above. It is, therefore, difficult to make out 
exactly the difference between his and Averroes’ interpretations. But what- 
ever its exact logical analysis, the concept of tarktb , it should be remembered, 
was the banner under which I. H. introduced his novel doctrine of vision. 

In Books IV and VII, I. H. applies the geometry of the parallelogram to 
dynamical models for the explanation of reflection and refraction. This raises 
further interesting questions about his approach to certain optical problems 
which I hope to discuss in the English volume for Books IV-VII. 

[3] r- Note the application, in the same paragraph, of ‘art’ ($ind e a) to natural 
science and of ‘art’ and ‘science’ ('t/m) to optics. Like their Greek equivalents, 
techne and episteme , the two words were often used interchangeably in Arabic 
scientific and philosophical literature. 

[3] 2. ‘ paying attention to its details and divisions’. The Arabic for the last 
word is taqsim anwaih , division of its species. I. H. probably has in mind the 
classification of modes of vision into rectilinear, reflected and refracted, and 
the corresponding divisions or branches of the science of optics. 




8 


Commentary 


9 


[4] Ancient concepts of 'the ray’. Some of the doctrines reported in this and in 
the preceding paragraph are readily recognizable. The view that vision occurs 
as a result of receiving into one’s eyes the ‘forms’ sent out by the visible objects 
is, of course, that of the Peripatetic philosophers, and it was adopted by I. H. ’s 
contemporary, Avicenna. In earlier presentations of this view, rays, whatever 
their nature, played no clearly discernible role in the explanation of vision; or, 
as I. H. put it in the Discourse on Light (see below in this note), ‘the proponents 
of physical science [i.e. natural philosophers such as Aristotle and his fol- 
lowers] have no precise doctrine of the ray’. We are told in [3] that, according 
to mathematicians ‘in general’, a ray ‘has the shape of a cone the vertex of 
which is the centre of the eye and the base is the surface of the visible object’. It 
is characteristic of I. H. that he gives only the briefest descriptions of the 
hypotheses attributed to the various mathematicians with regard to the 
nature, structure and mode of operation of ‘the ray’; in contrast to Avicenna in 
Book III of his De anima , it was not I. H.’s intention in the Optics to engage in 
any detailed examination of what he regarded, from the standpoint of his own 
theory, to be false (see below, note on [6] ). The result is that it is risky, at least 
in some cases, to attach historical names to the hypotheses that are distin- 
guished in the present paragraph, even though I. H. himself may have 
associated these hypotheses with definite historical figures. Thus the view that 
a visual power goes out of the eye all the way to the visible object itself can be 
identified with Euclid and Ptolemy, while the view that sight merely confers a 
certain quality upon the intervening air, thereby converting the air into an 
nstrument of sight, can be safely described as Stoic-Galenic. But problems 
arise with the other hypotheses. It was Euclid who postulated that rays 
emanate from the eye in the form of discrete and divergent straight lines 
(cf. Euclid’s Optics , Definitions I and III; Arabic version, MS Ahmet III 3464, 
fol. 59b; al-Tusfs ‘Recension’, in Rasa'il, 1, no. 5, p. 2), but nowhere in his 
Optics does Euclid state that these straight lines are ‘fine bodies’ (ajsam diqaq). 
(It was Galen who, in Bk X o {De usu partium , compared the visual rays to ‘fine 
threads’ \khuyut diqaq] like those of a spider’s web — see the Arabic version in 
Escorial MS 850, fol. 29a-b, and Bibl. Nat. MS ar. 2853, fol. i83a-b; also 
Galen, On the Usejulness of the Parts of the Body , trans. May, pp. 492-93; 
Lejeune, Euclide et Ptolemee , pp. 18-19.) Similarly, we know that the concep- 
tion of the ray as a solid or continuous cone of radiation was preferred by 
Ptolemy and al-Kindl (cf Ptol. Opt., p. 37 and n. 45; Lejeune, Euclide et 
Ptolemee , pp. 81-83; Alkindi, De aspectibus , Prop. nfLindberg, Theories of 
Vision , pp. 24-26; see also above, Introduction, p. lxiii, n. 93); but, again, 
neither Ptolemy nor al-Kindl refers to the continuous cone as a material body. 
Nor do I know who held the opinion that the solid cone is produced by the 
rapid motion of a single, rectilinear ray after it has reached the object. 


I. 1 W 

It is noteworthy that, although I. H. rejects the hypothesis of visual 
radiation of any kind, the Ptolemaic conception of the ray as a solid cone 
clearly underlies his frequent use of the expression ‘lines of the ray’ (khutut 
al-shua'), i.e. lines that constitute the visual cone. (I have also translated this 
expression as ‘radial lines’.) 

To appreciate fully I. H.’s position, especially in regard to ‘philosophers’ 
and ‘mathematicians’, it will be helpful to reproduce here in translation what 
he has to say about ‘ray’ in the Discourse on Light: 

Every property (ma'na) that exists in one of the natural bodies and is one of the 
properties that constitute the essence (ma’iyya) of that body is called a substantial [or 
essential] form (sjlra jawhariyya ), for the substance of any body consists only of the 
totality of all properties that exist in that body and are not separable from it as long 
as its substance remains unchanged. Now the light in any self-luminous body is one 
of the properties that constitute the essence of that body, and, therefore, the light 
that exists in any self-luminous body is a substantial form in that body; and the 
accidental light ( al-daw ’ al-'aradl) that shows on the opaque bodies on which it 
radiates from other bodies is an accidental form. That is the opinion of those among 
philosophers who have verified the matter (ra'y al-tpuhaqqiqin min ashab e ilm 
al-falsafa). As for the mathematicians, they hold that the light that radiates from the 
self-luminous body, which is a form in that body, is a fiery heat ( harara nariyya) that 
exists in the self-luminous body. For they found that when sunlight is reflected 
from a concave mirror and the [reflected] light gathers in one point at which a 
combustible body is placed, that body will burn. They also found that when the air 
is irradiated by sunlight, the air becomes hot, and when the sun’s light shines upon 
an opaque body on which it remains for a while, that body will become sensibly 
hot. It thus became established in their minds on account of these states of affairs 
that the light of the sun is a fiery heat. Then they formed the opinion that all lights 
are of the same genus, that all of them are a fiery heat and vary only in respect of 
intensity and weakness, so that some lights cause burning and some not according 
to whether they are strong or weak, as is found with the heat of fire . . . Thus, 
according to mathematicians, all lights are a fiery heat that appears in the luminous 
body as fire does in the fire-bearing body . . . 

‘Ray’ (al-shu'd*) is the name of the light that extends along straight lines in 
transparent bodies. . . . Now the straight lines on which the light extends are 
imaginary and not sensible lines, and the totality of the imaginary lines together 
with the light that extends on them is what is called ‘ray’. The ray, therefore, is a 
substantial form ( sura jawhariyya) that extends on straight lines. Mathematicians 
have applied ‘ray’ to the ray of sight (shu e d e al-basar) only in analogy with the ray of 
the sun or of fire. For early mathematicians held the view that vision takes place 
through a ray that goes out of the eye to the visible object; that vision occurs by 
means of that ray; that that ray is a luminous power ( quwwa nariyya) of the same 
genus as light; that that power is the visual power (al-quwwa al-basira) and it extends 
from the eye on straight lines that originate at the centre of the eye, and when that 


10 


Commentary 


ii 


luminous power reaches the object it perceives ( adrakat ) the object. Thus the 
luminous power extending on the straight lines that issue from the centre of the eye, 
together with those straight lines, are what mathematicians call ‘visual ray*. 

As for those who hold ( man yard) that vision takes place by means of a form that 
comes from the visible object to the eye, they are of the opinion that the ray is the 
light that extends from the object along the straight lines that meet at the centre of 
the eye. For those who hold this opinion (ashab hadhd al-ra y) maintain that from 
every point of the light there extends light on every straight line that may issue from 
that point. So that when the eye faces a visible object in which there exists some 
light, be it essential (< dhdti ) or accidental (* aradt), then from every point in that light 
there extends light on every straight line that may extend between that point and the 
surface of the eye. Thus light issues from the object to the surface of the eye on an 
infinity of variously situated straight lines. But the imaginary straight lines that 
extend between the centre of the eye and the surface of the object are among the 
lines on which the light extends. The eye, therefore, perceives the form of the object 
from the light that reaches it along these lines alone. For those who hold ( man yard) 
this opinion believe ( ya'taqid) that the eye is naturally disposed ( matbu ') to sense the 
lights that reach it along these lines alone. . ., and they call ‘ray’ the light that 
extends on the straight lines that meet in the centre of the eye together with these 
lines themselves. 

Therefore the visual ray according to all mathematicians is a certain light that 
extends on straight lines that meet at the centre of the eye; and these lines by 
themselves are imaginary lines which mathematicians call ‘lines of the ray’ ( khutut 
al-shu'a '). And, speaking generally, the ray is a light that extends along straight 
lines, whether it is the light of the sun, the moon, the stars, or the light of fire or of 
sight. That is the definition of the ray. But the proponents of physical science have 
no precise doctrine (qawl muharrar) of the ray ( Qawl Ji al-Daw\ in Rasa'il , pp. 2—3, 
Sh-io). 


[6] Method of inquiry. Istiqrd 3 /inductio and xtibar/ experimental. I. H. charac- 
terizes his effort as a ‘recommencement’ of the study (nasta’nif al-nazar) of the 
science of vision — a recommencement in which ‘principles and premisses’ are 
themselves made the subject of investigation and, hence, of revision. He 
announces further that his inquiry will begin with an examination of observ- 
able conditions (what he calls ‘particulars’ and ‘things that exist’), from which 
alone he will draw generalizations. And this will be followed, he says, by a 
gradual and orderly ascent in the reasoning, while criticizing premisses and 
exercising caution in the drawing of conclusions (the language of the whole 
passage is strikingly Baconian). Once again, the contrast with Avicenna’s De 
anima is noticeable. Whereas Avicenna would uphold the Peripatetic account 
of vision by a series of refutations of all contrary hypotheses, I. H. intends to 
establish his own theory solely on the basis of positive, empirical evidence. 


I. 1 [6] 

The differences of opinions among earlier philosophers (all too briefly sum- 
marized in [3-4] ) present him with a challenge which he proposes to meet, not 
by critical analysis of these opinions, but by a fresh examination of the relevant 
facts of experience. Consistently with this approach, I. H.’s ‘refutation’ of the 
visual-ray hypothesis (in I, 6[5<5--6o] ) consists of an argument to the effect that 
the hypothesis is ‘futile and superfluous’ (I, 6[54] ), that is to say the hypothesis 
is shown to be redundant in the presence of an alternative theory which is 
supported by factual evidence. It is characteristic of I. H.’s approach that, 
having left behind him all visual-ray theories, he is no longer concerned about 
them and he feels no compulsion to embark on any detailed analysis or 
criticism of them. This is one clear indication of the fact that his book 
represents a new beginning in the history of mathematical optics. 

In his brief description of his adopted method of inquiry I. H. employs 
ta$affuh (survey or review) and istiqrd 3 (inspection or induction), two terms 
which he apparently conflates and which he obviously takes to be self- 
explanatory, being commonly used in the philosophical literature of his time. 
It is curious that he does not also refer here to the important concept of 
experimentation ( xtibar ) which dominates the whole of the Optics and in fact 
constitutes one of its most distinctive features. But this is only one of many 
examples in the history of science where, in characterizing his procedure, a 
scientist draws on currently held and influential concepts rather than on his 
own practice. It will, therefore, be useful to make a few historical remarks 
about the methodological terms of istiqrd 3 and xtibdr. 

istiqrd 3 /inductio 

It is not immediately clear why the Arabic translators of Aristotle chose 
istiqrd ’ for his epagoge , the well-known term usually rendered as ‘induction’, a 
form of argument leading from particulars to universals. W. D. Ross has 
counted five senses of the verb epagein as used technically in the Aristotelian 
corpus, none of which can be directly translated by istaqrd (or istaqra’a), the 
verb from which the verbal noun istiqrd 3 is derived (see his edition of Aristotle's 
Prior and Posterior Analytics, pp. 481-83). In four of these senses epagein has the 
general meaning of ‘to lead on’, with the explicit or implicit reference to a 
personal direct object — someone who is being led on from a consideration of 
particulars to a general conclusion. The fifth sense is associated with a usage of 
the middle epagesthai , namely its usage in the sense of citing or adducing 
instances, as, for example, in adducing witnesses or testimonies. Ross 
observes that it is this last sense of the word which is often thought to be the 
origin of the technical meaning of epagoge , though Aristotle himself ‘appar- 
ently never uses the word of the citation of individual examples to prove a 


12 


Commentary 


13 


general conclusion’ (ibid., p. 482). He concludes that the technical (logical) 
usage of epagein in Aristotle was a result of conflating these meanings. 

Now the Arabic verb istaqra’a can never take as a direct object a person to 
whom the act of istiqra’ is applied in a sense that can be related to epagein. 
When, at least in one place, the translator of Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics 
(Matta ibn Yunus) tried, with only partial success, to keep close to the sense of 
epagein as used in the passive with a personal subject, he had recourse to 
another verb, ahdara, which means ‘to bring in’ (the passage is at 71*20; see 
'A. Badawi’s edition of the Arabic text, Mantiq Aristu, 11, p. 311, 1 . 1). But the 
use of ihddr was untypical (as was also the use of i'tibar, which was sometimes 
adopted; see M. Mahdi in Journal of Near Eastern Studies , 24 [1965], p. 138); and 
istiqra’ became the more regular word for Aristotle’s epagoge , both in transla- 
tions of Aristotle’s own works and in the subsequent writings of Islamic 
philosophers. Deriving from the triliteral root QRW(Y), the verb istaqrd , or 
the liamza- supplied form istaqra’a , has the general meaning of surveying (the 
Arabic lexicographers use tatabbu', looking over or passing in review) as, for 
example, in inspecting or going through a series of places one by one. The 
Mu jam maqdyis al-lugha of Ahmad ibn Faris (tenth century a.d.) connects this 
meaning with another, usually kept separate by the lexicographers, namely 
that of gathering together or collecting; and he also sees a connection with the 
use of qari’ in the sense of witness: a witness gathers information concerning 
others for future citation (see A. M. Harun’s edition, v, pp. 78-80). However 
that may be, the direct objects of this ‘reviewing’ or ‘gathering’ are individual 
things, not any general conclusion to be drawn from them nor any person to 
be led on from them to such a conclusion. It would thus seem that, when they 
made their choice of istaqra’a , the Arabic translators probably had in mind 
primarily the sense of epagesthai. 

The question before us is how to translate the verb istaqra’a in a work 
originally written in Arabic, but also reflecting Aristotelian usage. The 
question is a general one and may be asked with reference to many of those 
philosophical terms that came to exist in Arabic as a result of translation from 
Greek. They tend to lead two lives, one of which continues their current usage 
in normal Arabic, while the other strives, with various degrees of success, to 
parallel a technical usage that was originally introduced in the context of a 
different language with different linguistic features and possibilities. 

Take the expression istiqra’ al-juz’iyyat, frequently employed in translating 
Aristotle and subsequently by the Islamic philosophers and by I. H. If, guided 
by the common English rendering of the Aristotelian epagoge , we were to 
translate this as ‘induction of particulars’, the result would not exactly be good 
logic or good English. (I say this despite my awareness that the words 
‘induction of particulars’ or ‘of individuals* sometimes occur in English 


L 1 [61 

translations of Aristotle — for example, in the translation of the Topics in 
Ross’s Works of Aristotle, and in The Loeb Classical Library, at io8 b io.) Nor 
would the meaning of the Arabic phrase be faithfully conveyed by such a 
translation. Even when the aim is to arrive at general conclusions, we would 
have to say something like ‘inspection or examination of particulars’. At the 
same time there can be no doubt that istiqra ’ is very often used in Arabic 
philosophical literature in the sense intended by Aristotle’s epagoge and, in 
these cases, should be translated as ‘induction’. 

I. H.’s use of the verb istaqra’a and the verbal noun istiqra ’ exhibits this 
duality. When, in the Dubitationes in Ptolemaeum , he remarks that Ptolemy 
limited his investigation in the Optica to seven only of more than twenty 
visible properties, and faults Ptolemy’s ‘survey of these properties’ ( istiqra ’ 
al-mubsarat) for being incomplete, he is using istiqra’ in the sense of ‘enumera- 
tion’ ( aUShukuk 'ala Batlamyus , pp. 64-65). Clearly related to this is I. H.’s use 
of istiqra ’ in many places in the Optics to mean ‘survey’ or ‘review’, e.g. in 

I, 2(5], II, 2[27], 3(223, 225, 230], thus betraying the sense of tatabbu' noted by 
the lexicographers. Often in the same book the verb istaqra’a means ‘to 
examine’ or ‘to inspect’, where the objects of examination are particulars or 
instances of a certain kind (e.g. species of light): I, 3[2i, 22], 6[i8], II, 3[222, 
225]. Sometimes the ‘inspection’ has nothing to do with drawing general 
conclusions, as when it is inspection of the parts or features of an individual 
object (e.g. the letters of a written word) with the purpose of identifying it 
(II, 3[3o], 4(5, 18, 20, 21, 22, 34], III, 7[i]) — this again revealing the sense of 
tatabbu'. And yet, the Aristotelian concept of ‘induction’ as the transition from 
particulars to universals is also unmistakably present. Thus we have in 

II, 2[27] one of several examples in which istiqra ’ designates a survey of 
particulars the purpose of which is clearly to perform an inductive inference in 
Aristotle’s sense. Other examples are in I, 2(5] and 2[22]. When, therefore, 
I. H. says in I, 1 [6] that certain conclusions are ‘gathered by istiqra * (wa 
naltaqitu bi-al-istiqra’), something like Aristotelian induction is meant, and this 
is confirmed by the statement in I, i[i] that ‘premisses [which are universal] 
are gleaned ( multaqata ) from the senses’. 

A century before I. H., the philosopher al-Farabl explained the meaning of 
istiqra ’ in terms relevant to our discussion. He wrote in his Kitdb al-Alfa? 
al-tnusta'mala fial-mantiq (ed. Mahdi, p. 93) that one of the ways of establishing 
the truth of a judgement in which something is attributed to a subject is to 
review (tasajfalia) all or most of the particulars or instances (juz’iyyat ) of that 
subject; the judgement will be shown to be true if it is verified in all the 
instances examined. He goes on to say that istiqra ’ is the word applied to ‘the 
survey (tasaffuh) of particulars of a certain subject aimed at recognizing the 
truth of a [universal] judgement regarding that subject’. It is interesting that 


14 


Commentary 


15 


al-Farabi retains the conflation of istiqra' and tasajffuh in the sense of inspection 
or review (as I. H. does in I, i[6]) while explaining istiqra ' as an inference of 
general propositions. 

i e i tibar! experimental 

In an article published in 1971 I argued that in the Optics of I. H. there 
appeared for the first time a distinct concept of experiment consistently 
associated with three cognate words, xtabara, xtibdr and mu'tabir, which the 
Latin translation of the book rendered as experimental, experimentatio and 
experimentator , respectively (‘The astronomical origin of Ibn al-Haytham’s 
concept of experiment’ — see Bibliography). I argued further that the 
appearance of this concept, being essentially different from the Aristotelian 
and medical empeiria (almost always expressed in the Arabic literature by 
tajriba , experience), should be regarded not as a development within 
Aristotelianism or Galenism but as a ‘result of taking over into optics an idea 
[of testing] which had had an established career in astronomy’. (This was not, 
however, meant to imply that empirical tests are not to be found in the 
writings of Galen and Aristotle.) The following remarks repeat and expand 
the evidence for my previous arguments, with a view to clarifying I. H.’s 
frequent use of the term i'tibar and its cognates in the Optics . 

Common usage of the verb c abara (from the triliteral root C BR) and of the 
eighth form i'tabara reveals two related senses which persisted in the later 
technical application of the latter term. One is the general sense of examining 
(something), and the other is that of comparing or measuring something with 
another. Thus e abara could mean to examine or seek to determine, as in 'abara 
al-darahima , to weigh the dirhams, seeking to know their value. Similarly, 
xtabara al-shay'a is to examine or test the thing; and xtabara ba e da al-kitabi 
bi-ba e dihi is ‘to consider and compare one part of the book with another part, in 
order to understand it’ (Lane’s Arabic— English Lexicon). Vtabara occurs in the 
Qur'an (ux.2) in the sense of to take heed or warning or example from past 
happenings, the sense frequently encountered in works of history or moral 
teaching, as, for example, in the title of Ibn Khaldun’s famous book, Kitab 
al-'lbar. A jurisconsult might appeal to this Qur’anic usage to justify the 
employment of analogical argument ( qiyds ) in arriving at legal judgements, as 
Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Rushd, the grandfather of the famous philo- 
sopher, did in his Muqaddamat (1, p. 19). But we shall immediately see that it 
was not arguments by analogy which the Arabic mathematicians had in mind 
when they appropriated xtibdr for their own use. 

Our starting point is the Arabic translation of the Almagest where i e tibar first 
occurs in an astronomical context. In the so-called Hajjaj version, completed 
in a.h. 212/A. d. 827-28, the word frequently corresponds to synkrisis , mostly 


I. 1 [6] 

in the sense of comparing a set of astronomical observations with another. (I 
have consulted the Leiden MS Or. 680, often said to be the only surviving copy 
of that version. However, British Library Add. MS 7474, which contains only 
Bks I— VI, seems to be another copy of the same version, despite some minor 
differences.) In a different version (PIsIiaq-Thabit) represented by British 
Library Add. MS 7475 (copy completed on 3 Sha'ban, a.h. 615/A. D. 1218 and 
containing only Bks VII-XIII), muqdyasa (comparison) appears to be the 
generally preferred word for synkrisis , though xtibdr is also sometimes used. 

A crucial passage occurs in Almagest , Bk vu, ch. 1, where Ptolemy discusses 
the question whether the zodiacal stars had fixed positions with respect to 
those outside the zodiacal belt. If they did then all the stars in the heavens 
shared the slow movement of precession. Hipparchus had decided to answer 
this question in the affirmative, so Ptolemy tells us, but only by reference to a 
few and unreliable observations made by earlier astronomers (Aristyllus and 
Timocharis). Ptolemy here offers to put Hipparchus’ opinion on a more solid 
basis by comparing ( ek tes synkriseds) his own observations with those of 
Hipparchus. And ‘to provide a convenient test of the matter [tes procheirou 
peiras heneken ], we too will adduce here a few of his observations, [namely] 
those which are most suitable for easy comprehension and also for giving an 
overview of the whole method of comparison [pasan synkrisin ], by showing 
that the configurations formed by stars outside the zodiac, both with each 
other and with stars in the zodiac, have been preserved unchanged’ (Toomer’s 
trans., p, 322; Heiberg’s text, pt 2, p. 4). It is clear that we have to do here with 
a method of testing past observations by confronting them with those 
presently accessible. Finally, to help his successors to continue in this endeav- 
our, Ptolemy goes on to describe more configurations which he was the first 
to record. 

Now the Leiden MS renders peira in the phrase quoted above by tajriba (the 
whole expression: min ajl al-tajriba al-yasxra, for the sake of making an easy 
test); while the translator responsible for the later version in British Library 
Add. MS 7475 resorts to a conjunction of two terms, al-mihna wa al-xtibar 
(whole phrase: li-l-tashxl jt al-mihna wa al-i'tibar, to facilitate the test and 
comparison). That the word mihna (examination, test) should be conflated in 
this way with i c tibar is easy to understand in light of our remarks above; and 
since xtibdr could by itself mean examination, it is not surprising that in 
subsequent astronomical literature it quickly came to refer to the kind of 
testing envisaged in Ptolemy’s passage, namely testing by comparing one 
observation with another. 

It can be said that after the translation of the Almagest the ideal of testing 
became one of the chief motivations (or pretexts) for astronomical research in 
medieval Islam. It is possible that Islamic astronomers would have anyway 


i6 


Commentary 


been led to embark on observation programmes, if only to settle differences 
between the parameters they inherited from the various traditions (Indian, 
Persian, Greek), or in order to satisfy astrological needs. It is noticeable, 
however, that these programmes were repeatedly associated with Ptolemy’s 
authority, either explicitly by directly invoking his name, or implicitly by 
employing the terms we have noted in the Almagest . The new astronomical 
tables prepared under the direction of Yahya ibn Abl Man$ur during the reign 
of al-Ma’mun (813-33) were known as al-Zij al-mumtahan, or al-Zij al- 
mujarrab , ‘The Tested Tables’ (or Tabulae probatae, as they came to be called in 
the Latin West). In the version preserved in the Escorial MS 927 rasd is the 
name for observation, and imtihan the name for a process of testing Ptolemy’s 
tables by means of the new observations ordered by the Caliph. Al-BattanI in 
his influential Zij (c. 900) brings the concept of testing to the fore by claiming 
that Ptolemy ‘had urged that tests and (?) comparisons be made after him’ 
(fa-amara bi-al-mihnati wa al-i'tibari ba'dahu; Nallino, Al-Battani . . . Opus astro- 
nomicum , in, p. 7; idem, 7 /m al-falak , p.215). Here i'tibar is used either 
synonymously with milma or, which comes to the same thing, to denote the 
comparison of old observations with new ones for the purpose of checking 
and correcting the former. Nallino translates the conjunction by ‘observare et 
investigate’ (I, p. 5), reversing the order of the words in the conjunction. But 
al-Battanf s word for observation is rasd , which hejoins with imtihan (from the 
same root as mihna) in a reference to the observations he made at Raqqa (III, 
p. 7). He also has qiyas in the sense of measurement or determination by 
observation, as in the phrase: al-qiyasat wa al-arsad, wa al-mihan wa al-i'tibdrdt 
(III, p. 209); here i'tibar and mihna are undoubtedly equated with one another. 
The command attributed to Ptolemy (here and elsewhere, e.g ., in the intro- 
duction to the Ma’munic Zxj , in Escorial MS 927, p. 1) cannot be found 
expressly stated in the Almagest (Hartner in DSB , 1, p. 514, n. 31), but it is 
implied by the passage we have just cited, and indeed by the spirit of the whole 
book. A clear and instructive example of how the concept of xtibar could be 
put to service in astronomical investigation is the treatise by Ibrahim ibn Sinan 
(d. a.h. 335/A. d. 946) ‘On the Motions of the Sun’ (Ft Harakat al-Shams ; see 
Rasail Ibn Sinan , ed. Saidan, pp. 273-304). In it Ibrahim makes explicit use of 
the concept of ‘testing by means of observation’ (al-i'tibdr bi-al-rasd; the term 
mihna does not occur), and considers the result of a test to be either a refutation 
or confirmation of an assumed hypothesis (asl) (pp. 275, 284, 291—92). He 
describes his hypotheses as ‘conjectures’ (zunun) and ‘strong suspicions’ 
( shubah qawiyya) suggested to his mind by the phenomena (p. 301). A later 
astronomical work in which i'tib dr figures prominently, not only in its title but 
throughout its pages, is the twelfth-century al-Zij al-mu e tabar of ‘Abd al- 
Rahman al-Khazinl (British Library Or. MS 6669). 


17 


I. 1 [6] 

Apart from these conspicuous examples, both i'tabara and i'tibar can be 
found widely scattered in the scientific (especially astronomical) literature, 
where they occur in all the senses noted above. Abu Ma'shar, in the Madkhal 
(Leiden MS Or. 47, p. 37), refers to the ‘philosophers’ ’ practice of comparing 
(i'tabara) planetary positions as observed or measured (qasa) by themselves 
with the positions determined in earlier times (Ptolemy is specifically men- 
tioned). He further joins i'tibar at with amthila in the sense of observed patterns 
of association that may serve as a basis for future predictions. The Epistles of 
the Sincere Brethren (tenth century) conflate i'tibar with tajriba ( Rasa'il , in, 
p. 500). AI-BIruni conflates the same word with imtihan ( Rasa’il , pp. 20, 36; 
Kitdb al-Jamahir , p. 77). And the use of i'tabara to mean to observe or 
determine by observation is not infrequently attested (e.g. in al-Kindl, 
cf F. Rosenthal, ‘Al-Kindl and Ptolemy’, p. 447; al-Tawhldl, lmta\ 1, p. 38; 
al-Blrunl, al-Qanun al-Mas'udi, 1, pp. 51, 52). 

A relevant question is whether i'tibar and i'tabara occurred in the Arabic 
translation of Ptolemy’s Optica. The question cannot be answered directly, but 
the Latin translation from the Arabic has at least two terms, experimentum (eight 
times) and experiri (once), which may have rendered the same Arabic words. In 
the Dubitationes in Ptolemaeum (p. 69), I. H. uses the passive tu'tabar in a direct 
reference to a passage in the Optica where we find consideratio fiat (Ptol. Opt . , 260: 
12). We shall see below that consideratio sometimes corresponds to i'tibar in the 
Latin translation of I. H.’s Optics. In any case, the original Greek text of 
Ptolemy’s book must have contained a word like peira which the Arabic version 
very likely translated by one of the expressions surveyed above. 

Turning now to I. H. let us first note the occurrence of i'tibar in some of his 
works other than the Optics. In an astronomical context he uses the term 
together with the cognate verb to denote the determination of planetary 
positions with the help of an armillary sphere (Maqala ji al-Binkam: ‘On the 
Water-Clock’, in MS Atif 1714, p. 81b). In the treatise ‘On the Determination 
of the Pole’s Altitude with Perfect Precision’ (Maqala jx Istikhraj irtifi' al-qutb 
'ala ghay at al-tahqiq) the verb i'tabara again occurs in the sense of to observe or 
determine by observation (MS Atif 1714, p.27a). On the other hand the 
optical work ‘On the Burning Sphere’ (Maqala jx al-Kura al-muhriqa) refers to 
the investigation of how light is refracted in different media by the conjunc- 
tion al-sabr wa al-i'tibdr , where the first word means probing or examining 
(MS Atif 1714, p. 91b). Here experimental investigation is clearly meant. The 
same conjunction occurs in another optical work, the Discourse on Light , and in 
a similar context ( Rasa’il , p. 8). The examinations liberally referred to by the 
term i'tibar in the treatise On the Light of the Moon (no. 8 in Rasa’il; see German 
translation by Kohl, cited in Bibliography) are clearly also experimental in 
character. 


i8 


Commentary 


Finally, to come to the Optics , we should first note that I. H. consistently 
eschews the term tajriba , the term corresponding to empeiria in the philo- 
sophical and medical literature with which he must have been thoroughly 
familiar, having himself made at one time summaries of many of Aristotle’s 
and Galen’s writings. (I. H. appears to us ctajriba inplaceofThfcirat least once, 
in On the Quality of Shadows — MS Atif 1714, fol. 32b.) I take this to mean that, 
to I. H.’s mind, the experimental knowledge to be presented in a work on 
optics was not obtained as a result of accumulated experiences, but rather 
through a kind of examination which, as the word i'tibar would indicate, he 
believed to be akin to the method of testing employed by the astronomers. 
Whether or not he was right in this belief is a question which I shall not go into 
here. In my opinion the experiments in the Optics , or most of them, are 
essentially different in form from both the repeated experiences of the 
physicians and the ‘comparisons’ of the astronomers. But right or wrong, the 
belief betrays I. H.’s intellectual affiliation as a mathematician and his own 
view of the nature of his inquiry, and it is likely to have influenced his 
understanding of the application he made of the concept he borrowed from 
astronomical practice. 

As already noted, i'tibar basically denotes examination in a rather general 
sense of the word. (In this general sense the Latin translation often uses 
consideration and the English translation ‘consideration’ — see, e.g.: I, 3 [10]; 
I, 3 [76]; II, 4[i 5]-) But it is the specific sense of testing which must lie behind 
the choice of this word in the Optics as a technical term. As I have tried to show 
above the word had been widely employed in this sense since the translation of 
the Almagest. In astronomy, however, the kind of test associated with our 
term was in most instances understood as a comparison aimed at verifying or 
correcting past observations. A change in the meaning of the term was bound 
to happen when i'tibdr was transferred to an experimental discipline like 
optics. Testing remains as a form of proof, but a proof in which physical 
properties are directly investigated, sometimes with the aid of an experimen- 
tal apparatus especially designed for the purpose. And the aim of the proof was 
still to bring certainty or exactness and precision to an observation by 
subjecting it to an artificial situation in which conditions can be varied. To 
operate explicitly with such a distinct concept of experimental proof while 
regularly attaching it to a definite set of terms ( i'tibdr and its cognates), and 
thus dissociating it from the idea of accumulated experience or empeiria , was a 
significant conceptual development in the history of experimental science. It 
remains true, however, that the confirmatory experiments in I. H.’s Optics differ 
in at least one respect from the discovery experiments of seventeenth-century 
optics: they do not reveal new properties, such as the diffraction, double 
refraction or dispersion of light; and although some of them are supported in a 


I. 2 [9] 19 

remarkable way by geometrical arguments (e.g. 1, 3 [48-67],) they lack 
measurement. 

As with istiqra\ the words i'tabara and i'tibdr thus continued to be used in the 
Optics in a variety of senses which it is not always possible to render by a single 
expression. When, as in most cases, an experimental examination or test is 
meant, I have used these expressions, in addition to ‘experiment’. In some 
cases, the examination does not really involve experimentation, as in examin- 
ing ( Ctabara ) with the eye a circle drawn on a surface (I, 3 [55]), or the 
examination by the sense-faculty of the shape of an image in the common 
nerve (II, 3 [128] ) or of an object’s distance from the eye (II, 3[i4i]). In these 
and similar cases Ctabara is to scrutinize and is thus equivalent to ta’ammala (to 
contemplate), a word frequently used by I. H. In other cases the verb means to 
estimate or measure, as in (vaguely) estimating a time interval or a magnitude: 

II, 3 [62]; II, 3(91] (in the last example the Latin has mensurare). I. H. conjoins 
burhan (demonstration or proof) and i'tibar in the Discourse on Light ( Rasa’il y 
p. ri); that the function of an i'tibdr is to produce certainty ( yaqin ) is clearly 
expressed in the Optics , e.g. in I, 2[i] and I, 3 [29]. The not infrequent expres- 
sion i'tibdr muharrar associates experiment with precision or exactness (or 
certainty) — but still without the implication of numerical quantification: 

I, 2[6]; I, 3 [29]- 

[7] 1 . I have used the descriptions that follow as titles for the seven Books of 
the Optics. No such titles are supplied in the extant manuscripts of the 
individual Books. 

[8] 1 . It is not clear to which one of his earlier treatises I. H. is referring here. 
See Introduction, sec. II. 

CHAPTER 2 

The chapter is a summary account of the conditions of vision, a subject which 
is taken up in more detail in Bks II and III. Paragraph [25] introduces the 
concepts of ‘moderate’ and ‘immoderate’ ranges for visual perception, but 
only with respect to distance or remoteness from the eye — see III, 3 [6] for 
more general statements of these concepts. Since illumination is one of the 
conditions enumerated, the discussion in this chapter is presented in [26] as a 
preparation leading to the investigations in the following chapter, which are 
concerned with the properties of light and the modes of its radiation. 

[5-9] A survey ( istiqra ’) of visible objects consistently exhibits the ‘uniform’ 
or ‘persistent’ ( muttarid ) occurrence of a certain property or mode of beha- 
viour, e.g. that objects situated with the eye in the same atmosphere are seen 
through uninterrupted straight lines between the eye and the object. An 


9 



20 


Commentary 


21 


accurate experiment (i'tibar muharrar) is subsequently made to establish 
‘beyond doubt' what the survey or inspection of particular cases has revealed: 
e.g. straight tubes and rulers are used to show that only straight lines may 
conduct the light at a given point on the object to the eye. The question is: 
what precisely does the experiment contribute in this case to what is already 
known before the experiment has been made? See note to I, i [6], under i'tibar. 

[6] I. ‘parallel to its sides’: muwaziyan li-khattay nihayatihd. 

[7] i. ‘on a straight line with the eye and the screening body’. Both E (65:7) 
and A x mistakenly read wa al-ba$ar al-sdtir , omitting a waw before al-sdtir. 

[12] 1. ‘something like colour’: yajri majra aUlawn , i.e. of the same sort as 
colour, or (something) that behaves like colour. See also [21]. 

[16] 1. ‘ dull, earthy and dark bodies’: al-ajsdm al-kadira wa al-turabiyya wa 
al-munkasifa. 

[17] 1. ‘dull colours’: munkasif(at) al-alwan. 

[21] I.‘ something like colour’. See [12], note 1. 

[22] 1. ‘designs’. The Arabic nuqush (sing, naqsh) is often used in the book to 
refer to decorative designs, patterns or figures, without specifying whether 
these are drawn, painted or sculptured — a usage which is widely attested in 
Arabic literature before and after I.H.’s time. The word may thus be 
translated as drawings, paintings, mouldings, sculptures or engravings. 
Reflecting this ambiguity, the Latin translation of the Optics employs two 
terms: picturae and sculpturae (see Arabic-Latin Glossaries). In general, how- 
ever, I have opted for ‘designs’ as a neutral word with a relatively wide 
coverage. As in this paragraph, nuqush are frequently cited by I. H. as 
examples of fine features in a visible object the observation of which requires 
special attention because of their minuteness; thus the emphasis is frequently 
on size rather than on whether the nuqush are coloured or sculptured. 
Sometimes, however, I. H. makes specific the character of a design, as for 
example in I, 6[i 14] where the nuqush are expressly said to be coloured, or in 
III, 7(98] where they are qualified as being engraved (bi-al-hajr). (In I, 4[n] the 
fine dcsigns/nuqush daqxqa are supposed not to be distinguishable in colour 
from their smooth/ $aqil background.) The following notes point out some of 
the more important occurrences of this term in the Optics. 

[25] 1. ‘and scrutinized by that sight itself’: wa al-tafaqqud bi-dhalik al-ba$ar 
bi-'aynih , as in A r (which, however, has al-mub$ar in place of al-basar ), but 
omitted from E 71:11, after al-ta'ammul. 

chapter 3 

Of all the chapters in the first three Books this alone is entirely devoted to a 
study of light and colour without reference to their effect on the eye. 


I- 3 (a) 

Concentrating in this chapter on the property of straight-line propagation of 
light and colour and on the manner in which they radiate from points on the 
surfaces of self-luminous or illuminated objects or from points in illuminated 
transparent media, I. H. clearly aims to lay down the ‘physical’ foundation for 
the theory of rectilinear vision which he expounds in the remainder of Book I 
and in the two subsequent books. The chapter may nevertheless be viewed as 
an independent investigation of the behaviour of external light and, as such, it 
illustrates I. H.’s approach as an experimental physicist. In the main he is 
concerned (1) to establish a distinction between light as it exists in self- 
luminous bodies and light as it exists in illuminated surfaces or illuminated 
transparent media; (2) to examine the manner of radiation of both kinds of 
light, in which connection I. H. formulates what has been called ‘the principle 
of punctiform analysis’ of luminous surfaces; and (3) to argue that colours, 
like lights, have an objective existence which does not depend on their being 
perceived, and that they radiate from coloured objects in the same manner as 
light. 

a. Ontology and vocabulary of light and colour 

To the question ‘What is light?’ the only implied answer in the Optics is that it 
is a form ($ura). But no definition of ‘form’ is given in this book, and for such a 
definition we have to turn to I. H.’s Discourse on Light. There we are told that 
an ‘essential form’ is any property constituent of the essence ( maiyya ) or 
substance (jawhar) of a thing, and in this sense the light in a self-luminous 
body is said to be an essential form of that body (see above, Introduction, 
sec. II, and the quoted passages in Commentary, note on I, i[4] )- ‘Accidental 
light’, by contrast, is that which exists in a body that derives its illumination 
from outside. This is no more than a classification, but it means that all light is 
a property of physical objects, and that it has no existence apart from such 
objects although it is not itself a corporeal entity; and thus when I. H. speaks of 
‘the parts of light’ what he means are the lights that exist in parts of the shining 
bodies ( [98] ). To get a fuller idea of what, according to I. H., the ontological 
status of light and colour is, it will be necessary to put together some of the key 
expressions which embody his understanding of that status. Though scattered 
over the paragraphs of this chapter and other parts of the book, they together 
compose a coherent picture. 

I. H.’s regular word for light is daw * (unlike Avicenna, he has no special 
sense for nur — see below), and he applies the adjective mudV (luminous, 
shining) to both self-luminous and illuminated objects. Implied in this applica- 
tion is the doctrine that illuminated bodies, whether opaque or transparent, 
behave as if they shone with a light of their own, or, to put the matter In the 
Aristotelian terms employed in the Discourse , that ‘accidental’ light is emitted 


22 


Commentary 


23 


in the same manner as ‘essential’ light. Light is also said to ‘radiate’ ( ashraqa ) 
from both self-luminous and illuminated bodies, and it is called ‘primary’ 
(awwal) or ‘secondary’ ( thdnin ) according as it radiates from the first or the 
second kind of bodies ([21, 88]). 

Light ‘issues’ or ‘emanates’ ( kharaja , sadara) from a luminous object, and it 
‘reaches’, ‘arrives’ or ‘occurs’ ( wa$ala , warada , ha$ala) at another object. By 
themselves these words do not necessarily imply a process taking place in time 
(see, however, note on I, 3[6o-6i]). In addition to the words listed above the 
English translation also uses ‘to pass’, ‘to proceed’ and even ‘to travel’ — from 
one place to another. 

The extension of light always takes place in transparent media (air, water, 
glass, etc.). Transparency ( al-shafif) is a property of the medium, in virtue of 
which light is allowed to be ‘conveyed’ or ‘transmitted’ ( taadda , nafadha) from 
one point to another. The word is opposed to two others: ‘opacity’ ( kathafa ) 
and density (ghilaz ), both of which commonly mean thickness. Opacity is a 
property of coloured objects and it causes the impinging light to be ‘fixed’ 
(thabata) in them as accidental light (I, 2(12]). Density is a property which 
transparent bodies possess in various degrees, and it too causes some of the 
traversing light to be fixed in them. (In the Discourse on Light it is asserted that a 
certain degree of density must exist in all transparent bodies, including the 
body of the heavens.) The connection between opacity and colour is a 
necessary one: every opaque object has colour, or, in the case of the stars and 
fire, ‘something like colour’ (I, 2[i2], 3 [ 1 1 3 ] ); and every transparent body 
with some ‘opacity’ in it must be to some extent coloured (I, 2[i2, 21]). A 
transparent body is said to have some opacity in it when its ‘density’ exceeds 
that of air (I, 2[2i]). 

Uncertainty may arise with regard to the nature ( md’iyya ) of colours, but 
their objective reality (anniyya — from anna al-shay’a mawjudun , that the thing 
exists) cannot be doubted in the face of observational evidence ([136-137]). 
Colours are as real as light and they exist as forms or properties of coloured 
objects independently of light and of the percipient ([132 ff]). It is possible 
that they are able to extend themselves or ‘radiate’ into the adjacent medium in 
the absence of light, but whether they do so in fact or not they always 
accompany the light that radiates from or through coloured bodies and they 
cannot be perceived without the presence of light ([129 ff], also I, 8[6]). (At 
the end of [143] I. H. appears to favour the hypothesis that illumination is 
necessary for the radiation of colours to take place.) I. H. speaks of the form of 
colour as being ‘mixed’ ( mumazija , mumtazija) with that of light as the two 
proceed from illuminated coloured objects. He clearly envisages a mingling in 
which the two elements retain their identity. His is definitely a dualist theory 
of light and colour. But the dualism does not extend to their modes of 


I- 3 (b) 

behaviour: whether in emission, rectilinear propagation, reflection or 
refraction, colours (or their forms) obey exactly the same rules as light. A 
similar observation equally applies to the ontological dualism of essential and 
accidental lights. 

I. H. ’s distinction between essential and accidental light bears some resem- 
blance to Avicenna’s well-known distinction in his De anima between daw 3 and 
nut , rendered in the Latin translation (though not consistently) as lux and 
lumen , respectively (Rahman’s edn, pp. 91-92; Van Riet’s edn, Bks I— III, 
pp. 169-71). Daw 3 according to Avicenna is a quality in the so-called self- 
luminous bodies which causes them to be visible without their exhibiting any 
particular colour. Niir is a quality which, having radiated ( sata'a ) from a 
luminous source upon a coloured surface, which it covers, makes the colour of 
the surface visible. I.H.’s contribution in the present chapter does not, 
however, consist in drawing the above distinction (which, as noted above, 
merely serves him as a classification), but in his systematic experimental 
examination of the modes of emission and propagation of both kinds of light, 
an examination which leads him in fact to establish the behavioural identity of 
essential and accidental lights (see the following comment on the Punctiform 
analysis of the radiation of light and colour). 

Lights vary only in respect of ‘strength’ ( quwwa , or occasionally, shidda , 
intensity) and ‘weakness’ (da'f). I have consistently translated the adjective 
qawi by ‘strong’; for the opposite da'if I have used ‘weak’, ‘faint’, ‘feeble’, 
‘dim’. Raqiq , in the sense of weak, is sometimes said of light, as in z HI raqiq 
al-daw \ which I have rendered as ‘faintly illuminated shadow’ (I, 3 [126]). 

See comment (a) to Bk I, ch. 4, on Colour names and colour adjectives. 

b. Punctiform analysis of the radiation of light and colour 

Since all points on a visible surface can be seen from all points in front of it, it 
follows, on the assumption of rectilinear vision, that radial lines can be drawn 
from any point on the surface to any opposite point. If we further assume that 
vision results from what the eye receives of the light sent out by the object 
seen, then we may conclude that light proceeds in straight lines from every 
point on the visible surface to all opposite points in the adjoining medium. 
Equally common observations of shadows suggest the same conclusion, and, 
therefore, it must have been known, at least implicitly, to investigators of the 
phenomena of light and vision from early times. And yet it would seem that it 
was I. H. who first raised this conclusion to the status of a basic principle of 
optics which he formulates as such and supports by carefully arranged and 
sometimes sophisticated experiments. 

The Aristotelians and the atomists had tended to regard the ‘forms’ ( eide) 
and ‘idols’ ( eidola ) as coherent entities representing the visible aspect of the 


24 


Commentary 


object as a whole. I. H. espoused the language and the ontology of the 
Aristotelians on condition that the total form be atomized into forms of 
individual points (or very small parts) of the object that can be examined 
independently of one another. By thus analysing the visible surface into 
punctiform elements (as Vasco Ronchi has put it — see his Histoire de la 
lumiere , p. 38) I. H. was able to formulate a principle which became the basis of 
his mathematization of the Aristotelian version of the intromission hypothesis 
by submitting this version to a geometrical treatment in terms of lines and 
angles (Chapter 6). A complete statement of the principle as it appears in the 
present chapter would read: from the light and colour of every point in a 
luminous body, forms of that light and colour proceed in all straight lines that 
can be imagined to extend from that point — where ‘light’ refers to accidental 
as well as to essential light, whether the accidental light exists in the surface of 
an opaque object or in the body of a transparent medium. And since light and 
colour exist in bodies as forms which either naturally inhere or are temporarily 
fixed in these bodies, the principle can also be formulated thus: from the forms 
of light and colour at every point in a luminous body, forms of that light and 
colour proceed in all straight lines that can be extended from that point. 

David C. Lindberg has called attention to an earlier explicit statement of this 
principle (or, rather, to a partial expression of it) in al-Kindi’s De aspectibus 
(‘Alkindi’s Critique of Euclid’s Theory of Vision’, Isis, 62 (1971), pp. 481-86; 
Theories of Vision , pp. 26-30). In Proposition 13 of this book al-Kindi con- 
cludes from a series of simple observations on shadows that any point A on the 
surface of an opaque object (or in the atmosphere) receives illumination from 
every point p on a luminous body ( corpus luminosum), provided that an 
unobstructed straight line can be drawn from A to p: ‘Non ergo restat, nisi ut 
lumen proueniat per corpus luminosum in toto aere ab eo contento, et ut 
omnis locus, a quo possibile est produci lineam rectam ad notam corporis 
luminosi, illuminetur a lumine corporis luminosi’ (De aspectibus, p. 22). In 
other words, from any point on the shining object, light radiates rectilinearly 
to every opposite point. In Proposition 14 al-Kindi applies this principle to 
visual radiation with a view to explaining why objects at or near the centre of 
the visual field are seen more clearly than those near the periphery. His 
argument assumes that the visual power (potentia comprehendendi uisibile) 
resides in the whole of the gibbosity (gibbositas = Viadaba) of the eye (arc ag of 
the small circle representing the eyeball with centred — Fig. C. I. 1). It is 
stated that visual illumination continuously spreads out from each point on arc 
ag to cover an area of the atmosphere limited on one side by the tangent to the 
arc at that point. The extent of the field of vision is thus defined by lines such as 
hat and kgi , drawn tangentially at points such as a and£ on the edge of the eye’s 
gibbosity. Al-Kindi shows that the visual lines that can be drawn from points 


I- 3 (b) 2 s 

in the visual field hlk increase in number as one moves from the periphery 
towards the centre, reaching a maximum at /, the point directly opposite the 
centre of the eye. Point /, and points close to it, will therefore receive more 
‘illumination’ from ag than those closer to h and k\ and, as a consequence, the 
area around l will be more clearly visible than areas near the edges of the field. 



A very similar explanation of the clarity of central vision is found in the 
treatise by Ahmad ibn 'Isa On Optics which, like al-Kindf s De aspectibus , 
belonged to the ninth century and was probably written before al-Kindi’s 
work (see above. Introduction, pp. xxxvi-xxxvii and n. 39). Ahmad, like 
al-Kindi, accepted the hypothesis of continuous visual radiation (against 
Euclid) and he also had the idea that perception of a given point in the visual 
field was in general effected through all points on an area of the surface of the 
eye which we may designate as the visually effective area. He draws the cone 
TAB with T at the centre of the eyeball (al-nazir) and base AB at the visible 
object (al-manzur ilayh) (Fig. C. 1. 2). 

The effective area of vision is represented by the arc GDE , cut off by the 
cone. Any point on AB is said to be seen through every point on GE , from 
which a straight line can be drawn to the visible point. In the case illustrated by 
the figure, point W on the axis of the cone is visible from all points on GE, and 
thus W will be seen more clearly than points close to A and B because it is 
reached through more lines than any of those points. For example, GZBeing 
drawn tangent to the circle at G, it is clear that no points on segment ZB will 


26 


Commentary 


27 



Figure C I. 2 

In both MSS, GZ, assumed to be tangent to the circle at G, is drawn parallel to TB. 

be visible from G, And so on. (MS Laleli 2759* fols 27a-29b; MS Ragip Pa$a 
934, fol. 7a-9b.) 

In this argument, and in contrast to al-Kindi, Ahmad does not consider 
visible points outside the cone with vertex at the ocular centre. But he 
definitely enunciates the idea that visual radiation is diffused as it goes 
forward. To illustrate the ‘natural* tendency of ‘the luminous ray’ to spread 
out ( yanbathth ) in the shape of a cone, he places one end of a tube at the surface 
of the eye: the tube will restrict the passage of the luminous power issuing 
from points on that surface, but as the light comes out of the tube at the other 
end it fans out to assume the natural conical shape. Thus the visible area at a 
distance from the far end of the tube will be larger than that defined by straight 
lines drawn from the centre of the eye or from points on the visually effective 
area and grazing the far edge of the tube. (MS Laleli 2759, fols 32a-33b; MS 
Ragip Pa$a 934, fols I2a-i3a.) 

There is no evidence that I. H. knew al-Kindf s De aspectibus or Ahmad ibn 
'Isa’s Optics , though it is likely that he was acquainted at an early time in his 
career with the latter, inferior work (see above, Introduction, pp. xxxvi-xxxvii 
and n. 39). So far as I am aware there is only one reference to al-Kindi in the 
extant works of I. H. , and this occurs in a geographical context (MS Ahmet III 
3329, fol. 70b = ?io8b). Noris there solid evidence for the view, first expressed 
by Wiedemann in 19 11 and later adopted by others, that the De aspectibus 


I. 3 (b) 

enjoyed wide circulation in the Islamic world (Wiedemann, ‘Ueber das Leben 
von Ibn al Haitam und al Kindi’, p. 7; also Meyerhof, ‘Die Optik der Araber’, 
p. 2o;Lindberg, Theories of Vision, p. 31). Whatever evidence there is consists of 
two references to al-Kindi in the biographical notices written in the eleventh 
and thirteenth centuries by al-Bayhaqi and al-Shahrazuri, respectively. Al- 
Bayhaql tells us that he owed all of what he learnt of the propositions of optics 
to a ‘work’ (ta$nif) by al-Kindi (he does not cite a specific title) which he 
describes as ‘out of the ordinary’ (nadir fi dhdlik al-fann ; Tatimma , p. 25; the 
confession betrays al-Bayhaqi’s ignorance of I. H.’s Optics). In the same vein, 
and very probably doing no more than echoing al-Bayhaql, a single statement 
in al-Shahrazurf s Tarxkh al-hukama ’ merely states that al-Kindf s ‘book on 
optics’ is ‘extremely good* (ji ghdyat al-husn wa al-jawda\ quoted by 'Azzawi 
from a sixteenth-century MS, in Isma'il Haqqi, Faylasuf al-'Arab, p. 128). 

At any rate al-Kindf s treatment of light radiation was too limited, and 
Ahmad’s was too confused. And, as Lindberg has noted, al-Kindf s explana- 
tions of clear vision raised problems for his theory which he made no attempt 
to deal with (Isis, 62 [1971], pp. 484-85; Theories of Vision, pp. 28-30), and a 
similar observation would equally apply to Ahmad. Nor do I doubt that their 
attempted explanations, appearing as they did so early in the Islamic period, 
reflected earlier Greek discussions which may now be irretrievably lost to us. 
But whatever be the nature of those discussions, there is no evidence 
anywhere that they exhibited anything like the clarity and comprehensiveness 
which characterize I. H.’s exposition. He first states the rectilinear extension 
of light from self-luminous bodies in [3]. That the light issues from ‘every 
part’ of such bodies is affirmed in [9], and it is said in [12] that radiation takes 
place in all straight lines that may extend from each part of a self-luminous 
body such as the sun. The principle of point-by-point radiation is then 
generally asserted of all self-luminous bodies in [19] and extended to ‘the small 
parts’ of these bodies in [20]. The extension is made on the grounds that small 
and large parts have the same nature or form, and therefore we must expect 
them to behave in identical fashion. (In al-Kindf s De aspectibus. Proposition 
13, the homogeneity of parts of a shining body serves a different purpose, 
namely as an argument against the separation of rays: ‘Corpora namque 
luminosa similium sunt partium. Non ergo partium eorum effectus diuersifi- 
catur, nec est possibile, ut ab una parte illuminet absque alia. Tunc enim 
corpus similium partium esset non similium partium. Quod quidem contra- 
rium esset et impossibile* [p. 21].) 

I. H. then goes on to apply his principle to the radiation of light from the 
illuminated air [35]. He then sets out to establish the point-by-point radiation 
from the surface of an opaque object in a lengthy passage beginning with [48]. 
(The elaborate experimental argument is explained below; see note on 


28 


Commentary 


[48-67].) ‘Secondary lights’ are shown to radiate from accidental lights, not by 
way of reflection (i.e. from a determinate point in a determinate direction), 
but in the way that ‘primary lights’ radiate from self-luminous bodies [88 ff]. 
I. H. does not apply the designation ‘secondary light* to reflected light, 
presumably because the latter is simply the impingeing light that has been 
turned back or repelled by the reflecting surface, and not a light generated by an 
accidental form residing in the surface of the illuminated opaque object. On the 
phenomenological level this amounts to drawing a distinction between 
specular reflection and what we now call ‘diffusion’. 

Reflected light extends from the points of reflection in straight lines 
[99-103], and so does refracted light from the points at which it enters into or 



From every point on the surface of the luminous (not necessarily self-luminous) 
source S light rectilinearly emanates in all directions. 

The light incident on the surface of the opaque object 0, having been ‘fixed' in 
that surface, emanates as secondary light from all points in all rectilinear directions. 

From the mirror m or the refracting surface r light is reflected or refracted from 
the point of incidence in the direction determined by the rules of reflection or 
refraction. 

From any point P on the path of the direct (primary), reflected or refracted ray, 
secondary light emanates in all rectilinear directions. 


I. 3 [6] 29 

emerges from a transparent body [104-107]. I. H. does not fail to record the 
observation that illuminated smooth surfaces and transparent bodies, being 
endowed with a certain degree of density or opacity, also emit a secondary 
(i.e. diffused) light that is weaker than the reflected or transmitted light [88, 
108-109]. All luminous bodies, whether their light is inherent or derived, send 
out radiations from every ‘point* in them ‘in the form of a sphere’ [1 10]. (The 
transition from ‘part* to ‘point* is made by I. H. himself.) 

The general picture that emerges is clear and complete (see Fig. C. I. 3). 
From all ‘parts’ or ‘points’ of any self-luminous body light radiates in primary 
rays that extend rectilinearly in all directions, thus illuminating the surround- 
ing atmosphere and whatever opaque, reflecting or refracting surfaces the rays 
may encounter. Some of the light will proceed along the directions of 
reflection and refraction, and some will be fixed in the transparent bodies and 
in the surfaces of opaque objects, thus giving rise to secondary rays (weaker 
than primary) that will extend from all points in these bodies and surfaces in all 
rectilinear directions. 

All previous statements are then affirmed to be equally true of colour 

[ 1 1 3 ff]- 

[!]!■ ‘It is similarly the case with the moon*. Note that the moon is here 
counted among self-luminous bodies (such as the sun and fire), contrary to the 
thesis defended in I. H.’s treatise On the Light of the Moon — see above, 
Introduction, sec. II; see also [4] and the conclusion stated in [8]. Since the 
‘accidental light’ of the moon radiates in the same way as the ‘essential’ light of 
the sun or fire, the result of the experiment is the same. The (seemingly) 
parenthetical paragraph [7], however, affirms the property of rectilinear 
propagation of ‘all kinds of light’, which might imply a distinction between 
sunlight and the light of fire on the one hand and the light of the moon on the 
other. But see [86, 94-96]. 

The moon is also mentioned among self-luminous bodies in a treatise 
written after the Optics , namely no. Ill 36: On the Quality of Shadows (MS Atif 
1714, fol. 32b). 

[3] 1. ‘If he tests the interval’: wa in i'tabara al-masdfata . . . wa qasaha. Note 
the use of qiyas as a means of establishing straightness, not measurement. Here 
xtabara and qdsa are conflated. See [6], note 2. 

[ 4 ] 1. ‘if the light of the moon is tested*. See [1], note 1. 

[6] 1. ‘facing a hole’. Reading muqabilatan li-thaqbin for muqabilatan li-baytin 
in A r and E at 74:12 

[6] 2. ‘ tested’: yuqas , obviously in the sense of yu'tabar. See above, discus- 
sion of itibar in note on I, i[6]. See also [3], note 1. 


30 Commentary 

[10] I. ‘which is the first to appear’. Reading alladht huwa awwalu juz’in 
yatlu'u for E’s (?and Afs) alladht huwa aqallu juz'in yatlu'u. 

[15] i. Here, again, consideration of the moon’s light comes between two 
examinations concerned with light from self-luminous bodies, the sun and 
fire. See [i], note i. 

[16] i. ‘any of this light’. Reading minhu rather than minha , as in A t and 
E 79:25. 


B 



a 


DARK CHAMBER 


A 



AB = The ‘outside wall’ directly illuminated by the light shining through the large 
circular hole at C. 

F = The ‘first chamber’ with door facing the outside wall. 

S = The ‘second chamber’ with door facing the indirectly illuminated wall of 
first chamber. 


I- 3 [39] 3i 

[20] 1. ‘the larger parts’. ‘Larger’ ( al-kabira ) is omitted from E (81:8) but 
occurs in A r . 

[20] 2. ‘ congregated parts’, ‘aggregate of parts’: ajza mujtami'a. Could 
‘parts’ ( ajza ’) here mean indivisible parts or atoms? 

[25-26] Figure C. I. 4 illustrates the experimental arrangements described 
in these two paragraphs. 

[29-37] The attached Figure C. I. 5 will help the reader to follow the 
experiment described in these paragraphs. 


EAST 



E is the eastern or ‘first’ chamber and W the western, ‘second’, also called ‘farther* 
chamber. 

H is the ‘first, higher hole’. 

L and Mare the two, ‘lower holes’ in the thickness of the common wall facing H. 

[31] 1. ‘ Both chambers’. Reading al-baytayn for al-thaqbayn in E at 87:2. A, 
has the reading in E without the diacritical points. 

[31] 2. ‘and look’: wa yanzur , the reading in A t . E [87:3] mistakenly has wa 
yantazir. 

[33] r - ‘This interval can be determined’. Reading tuharrar in place of tuhadd 
(in A, and S) and najid (in M). 

[33] 2. ‘the other hole’, i.e. the second of ‘the two lower holes’ in the 
common wall. 

[39] I. ‘[the light of] the air’. The bracketed words are omitted in A,, and in 
E at 90:12. 


32 


Commentary 


33 



Figure C. I. 6 

e = earth 

h = plane of the horizon of P. 
s = sun. 

P = ‘place on the face of the earth’ where the observer is located. On the left, P is 
shown at the middle of the earth’s shadow, and, on the right, near the edge of 
the shadow when the sun approaches the plane of the horizon ofP. 

AB = earth’s equator. 

CD = base of the earth’s conical shadow. 

EF = base of the earth’s shadow through P. 


I. 3 [48-67] 

[40] 1. ‘the borders of the shadow’: hawashi al-zill. As is clear from the 
context, this phrase designates the narrow margin within the umbra close to 
the umbra’s edge. 

[41] I. Figure C. I. 6 shows the two situations envisaged in this paragraph. 

[ 41 ] 2. ‘ the limit of the shadow’. Rendering muhit al-zill, boundary or 

limiting surface of the conical shadow. Nihaya (limit) is used once in the same 
paragraph, apparently in the same sense as muhit. 

[46] 1. ‘in valleys between mountains’: fi awdiyat al-jibal (E). MSS A,, M 
and S all seem to have ft ajhiyat al-jibal. If, instead of the emendation adopted in 
E, we put al-judrdn in place of al-jibal we get JT ajhiyat al-judran (in walled 
courtyards), which might perhaps make better sense. The latter phrase is 
actually used in [28]. 

[48-67] Experimental proof that \ accidental light’ radiates in straight lines . The 
long experimental argument presented in these paragraphs and, in particular, 
the geometrical proof which it involves, will, be easier to follow with the aid of 
diagrams which Nazlfhas provided with his reformulation of the argument in 
al-Hasan , pp. 160-63. 

The aim of the argument is to establish, by means of an ‘accurate experi- 
ment’ (i'tibar muharrar), that the radiation from the ‘accidental light’ existing in 



Figure C. I. 7 




34 


Commentary 


35 


a rough surface illuminated by any kind of light (daylight, sunlight, etc.) takes 
place only in straight lines. The experimental arrangement consists of two 
chambers W , E, placed side by side with their facing walls parallel to one 
another (Fig. C. I. 7). The exterior wall AB of chamber E is painted white and 
is exposed to the light. In the thickness of wall GD belonging to chamber W an 
opening is made to accommodate exactly a smooth rectangular wooden 
block, as thick as wall GD, which must first be prepared as follows. 



Bisect two opposite surfaces of the block (Fig. C. I. 8) with two lines parallel 
to one another and to two edges in each surface. On one of these lines, and 
close to the perpendicular edges, mark two points Z, H, about each of which a 
small circle is drawn. Then mark on the other line two points, T, / directly 
opposite points Z, H in this order, so that 

ZH = TI. 

Mark point K on TI such that 

TK thickness of the block 

KI interval between the two walls 

Draw about K , / two circles (called ‘the two near circles’ in the text) equal to 
the former circles about Z, H (called ‘the two far circles’, being farther apart 
than K, I). 

Now drill two cylindrical holes — one perpendicular, with axis HI , and the 
other inclined, with axis ZK. 


I. 3 [48-67] 

The block is then mounted in the aperture made for it in wall GD 
(Fig. C. I. 9), so that the surface having ‘the two near circles’ K, I is opposite 
and parallel to the exposed wall AB. 

Point M is then marked by means of the pointed end of a straight rod passed 
through the perpendicular hole (the rod having been made exactly equal in 
diameter to the width of the hole). 

From within chamber W and looking at the exposed wall through the 
perpendicular hole from any point on the circumference about H, the 
experimenter should instruct someone to mark on that wall the farthest point 



Figure C. I. 9 

from M that he can see from this position — let that point be L. A circle is then 
drawn about M with radius ML. This circle will enclose all points that can be 
seen from any point on the circle about H. 

On the assumption that vision takes place only in straight lines, I. H. proves 
that nothing more (or less) than the area contained by circle ML can be seen 
through the other, oblique hole from any point on the small circle about Z. 
And he finds this conclusion confirmed by actually looking at the exposed wall 
from various points on the circumference about Z. 

The proof, presented in [57-66], is as follows (Fig. C. I. 10): 

Let the axis HI of the perpendicular hole meet the white wall at M. On the 
assumption of rectilinear vision, L (the farthest point from Mas seen from O) will 


10 


36 


Commentary 


37 



H 

O 


Z 

d 


be the end-point of line OFS produced, where 5 is the point diagonally 
opposed to O, and F the mid-point on the axis HI. 

Since, by construction, 


TK = _HI_ 



KI 

IM ’ 


then. 

componendo. 




TK + KI 

HI + IM 


KI 


IM 

or 

TI 

HM 



KI 

IM 


Since 

TI = 

ZH, 


then 

ZH 

HM 



KI 

IM 



I. 3 [5i] 

And since KI // ZH, then points Z, K, M are on a straight line. 

Bisecting ZK at Q, then, FQ being parallel to Kl and ZH, we have in 
A FQM: 

FI = QK 
FM QM 

But, in A FML, 

FI = IS 
FM ML’ 

and IS is the radius of the perpendicular hole, which is equal to the radius of 
the oblique hole, say KC. 

Therefore, FI _ KC 

FM ML * 

therefore, QK __ KC 

QM ML 

And, therefore, points Q, C, L will be on a straight line; and the extension of 
line LCQ will pass through a point d on the circumference about Z and 
diagonally opposed to C; and dCL will be a straight line. 

Thus, on the assumption of straight vision, L will be the farthest point from 
M that can be seen from d. 

I. H.’s argument is therefore this: i/ light proceeded from the illuminated 
wall into the opposite chamber along non-rectilinear lines, then portions of the 
wall outside circle ML would be visible; but this is not the case; therefore, the 
antecedent is disproved and it is concluded that from the accidental light on the 
wall light emanates only in straight lines — just as light does from self- 
luminous bodies. 

The property that light radiates in this manner from every part , however 
small , of the accidental light is not stated until after further experiments have 
been described ([68-97]). The property is asserted by virtue of an argument 
postulating the homogeneity of smaller with larger parts. 

[50] 1 / of the two far circles’. Reading min al-da’iratayn al-mutaba'idatayn in 
place of A r ’s and E’s 'an al-da'iratayn al-mutaba'idatayn. 

[51] 1. ‘obliquely’: 'ala al-tarib ('ala al-ta’rib), apparently a workshop expres- 
sion which, like most such expressions, is not recorded in the classical 
dictionaries. It seems related to the common use of waraba (al-shay'a) (or 
waraba al-shay'a), meaning to give an oblique or slanting direction (to some- 
thing), or to position (something) in such a direction — a suggestion which I 
owe to DrGalal Shawki. The expression 'ala al-ta'rib occurs in al-Ghazall 
(tenth-eleventh centuries) in the sense of ‘diagonally’ — see his al-Munqidh, 




Commentary 


39 


38 

ed. "Abd al-Hamid, p. 146. The passive murab (or muwarrab ?) (slanted) occurs 
in al-Jazari, al-Jami\ ed. A. Y. Al-Hassan — see Arabic— English Glossary, 
P . 589. 

[52] 1. ‘ lathe’: shihr , from Persian chihra ; see Steingass, Persian-English 
Dictionary , s.v. 

[62] 1. ‘diagonally opposed points’: al-nuqat al-mutaqatira. 

[69] 1- ‘the essential light issuing from self-luminous bodies’. Here ‘essen- 
tial light’ applies to what I. H. earlier called ‘primary light’ (daw’ awwal) — see 
[21]. According to his stricter terminology essential light is that which inheres 
in self-luminous bodies. See, however, [88] where the phrase ‘the primary or 
essential lights’ (al-daw’ al-awwal al-dhdti) is used. See also comment (a) to this 
chapter. 

[71] 1* the interior surface of the perpendicular hole’: muhit dhalik al-thaqb 
al-qaim. See [80], note 1. 

[80] 1. ‘ interior surface [of the hole]’: sath al-thaqb. See [71], note 1. 

t»4] 1. ‘and in the ratio mentioned earlier’, a reference to [49]. 

[86] x. See [1], note 1. 

[90] 1. ‘iron mirrors. . . dim the lights because of their dark colours’: 
al-mardya al-hadid . . . taksifu al-adwa’a bi-alwaniha li-anna alwanaha muzlima. 

[92] l.‘ in an oblique direction’: e ala al-tarlb. See [51], note 1. 

[92] 2. ‘Upon this body being moved away’. Reading in ba"ada for E’s in 
ba ( uda. 

[93] i- 'if he replaces the sheet’. Reading ft mawdi ' al-sajtha in place of ft 
mawdi' al-daw’ in A r and E. 

[95] x. Here, again, moonlight is examined between examinations of the 
light of the sun and of fire (the latter in [96] ), as if moonlight belonged to the 
class of ‘essential lights’. See [1], note 1. 

[101] 1. ‘along its length’. Reading ft tuliha in place offitulihima (along their 
length) in A r and E. The reference is obviously to the ruler’s length. 

[105] 1. ‘bowl’: jam , a Persian word here designating either a glass drinking 
vessel or a piece of glass used in windows. The word is used in the latter sense 
in III, 7(178]. 

[114] x. ‘pale-coloured bodies’: ajsdm musfirat al-alwan . For the translation 
of musfir as a colour attribute, see comment (a) to Chapter 4; also note 1 to 
III, 7[l2l]. 

[114] 2. ‘purple, purpure, sa'wx- red, basil-green’. See comment (a) to Bk I, 
ch. 4; and note on I, 6[i 14]. 

[116] I. ‘light-coloured’ — or pale-coloured, musfirat al-alwan\ see [114], 
note 1. 

[120] 1. For the names of the colours mentioned in this paragraph, see 
comment (a) to Bk I, ch. 4. 


I- 3 [132] 

[124] 1. ‘lighter and clearer’: araqq . . . u/a asja. 

[124] 2. ‘becomes lighter and weaker’: izdada riqqatan wa dafan. 

[132-137] Compare these paragraphs with Ptol. Opt., II, 14-16, on the 
objectivity of colour. I. H. not only shares Ptolemy’s (and Aristotle’s) view 
that colours are real properties of visible objects, but also adopts Ptolemy’s 
arguments which, however, he expands and modifies in interesting ways. 
Ptolemy begins by reporting the opinion of ‘some’ (the atomists?) who denied 
the objectivity of colour ‘dicentes quod color sit res accidens uisui et lumini 
nec habet propriam subsistentiam, eo quod omnia sensibilia non indigent 
aliquo extrinsecus, colores autem indigent lumine’ (ibid., II, 14). The expres- 
sion ‘res accidens uisui et lumini’ is almost literally equivalent to I. H. ’s words 
at the beginning of [132]: shay’un ya'ridu bayna al-ba$ari wa al-daw 7, a thing that 
comes about between the eye (or sight) and light. But the mention in the same 
paragraph of rainbow colours as an example of such a thing is not in Ptolemy. 
The opponents’ argument that colours, unlike other sensibles, require some- 
thing external (namely, light) to manifest themselves, leads I. H. to discuss the 
effect of light upon perception of colour. On the objectivity of colour in 
Ptolemy, see Lejeune, Euclide et Ptolemee , pp. 24-28. 

[132] The colours of irises: some important observations. This paragraph begins 
with a statement of the (rejected) doctrine that colours do not inhere in the 
coloured bodies, or that ordinary surface colours are not ‘forms’ or properties 
of the objects which exhibit them. The doctrine is reported as one which 
assimilates the colours of opaque objects to the rainbow colours or irises 
(al-taqazih, from qaws quzah, the ancient Arabic name for the rainbow — see 
EP , s.v. kaws kuzah) that appear under certain conditions in the feathers of 
birds. In his argument (contained in this and in the following paragraph) for 
rejecting the analogy between the two classes of colours I. H. points out sortie 
important characteristics of irises which were to receive close and fruitful 
examination in the seventeenth century (Robert Hooke and Isaac Newton). 

I. H. affirms that irises seen in the feathers of some birds (peacocks are 
specifically mentioned in I, 4[25]) must be produced by reflection of the light 
falling upon them. For, he argues, it can only be because of this, and because of 
the fact that reflection always takes place in a determinate direction, that the 
colours of irises (their ‘forms’ or qualities or hues) vary with the incident light 
and with the angle of vision. It is also for the same reason, he asserts, that, 
when the feathers change position with respect to the eye, the ‘forms’ 
(qualities) of their irises change, as do the places on which certain colours are 
visible. There is thus a correlation between the angle of viewing and the colour 
seen at a particular point on the feather. (He adds finally that when the birds are 
observed in a dimly lit place the irises disappear and only the ‘original’ colours 
of the feathers become visible.) I. H.’s urging that the above observations be 


40 


Commentary 


41 


made with care would suggest that he was not simply reporting what he had 
found in a written source. Compare the following, partially similar, obser- 
vations in Lucretius’ De rerum natura : 

Moreover since colours cannot exist without light and first-beginnings [atoms] of 
things do not come out into the light, you may be sure they are clothed with no 
colour. For what colour can there be in a total darkness? Nay it changes in the light 
itself according as its brightness comes from a straight or slanting stroke of light. 
After this fashion the down which encircles and crowns the nape and throat of 
doves shows itself in the sun: at one time it is ruddy with the hue of bright pyropus; 
at another it appears by a certain way of looking at it to blend with coral-red green 
emeralds. The tail of the peacock when it is saturated with abundant light, changes 
in like fashion its colours as it turns about. And since these colours are begotten by a 
certain stroke of light, sure enough you must believe that they cannot be produced 
without it. ( The Stoic and Epicurean Philosophers , ed. Oates, p. 106; quoted in part by 
Guerlac, ‘Can there be colors in the dark?’, p. 10. See also, [pseudo-] Aristotle, De 
coloribus , in the Loeb edition of Aristotle, Minor Works , p. 1 1). 

Though more specific about the colours observed, Lucretius’ account is 
otherwise less informative and less precise than that of I. H. Lucretius is 
concerned to point out the effect of light on colour, but he does not mention 
the displacement of colours as the eye changes position. This paragraph, it 
should be noted, was not available to readers of the Latin version of the Optics , 
being part of one of the chapters that were missing from that version; see 
Introduction, sec. V. 

[132] 1. ‘the form of these irises’, i.e. the ‘qualities’ or hues of the colours. 
‘Quality’ ( kayjiyya ) is later used in the same paragraph. 

[134] 1. ‘For the colour of a man may be normal’: . . . sakin al-lawn, literally, 
a tranquil colour, or a colour betraying a tranquil state of mind. 

[135] 1. ‘a normal colour’. See [134], note 1. 

[144] 1. ‘pale-coloured al-musjirat al-alwan. See[ii4], note 1; [ 1 16], note 1; 
III, 7[i2i], note 1. 


CHAPTER 4 

a. Colour names and colour adjectives 

As would be expected, colour expressions in the Optics raise problems of 
interpretation and translation and, in a psychological theory of colour percep- 
tion, such as that we find in this chapter and in other parts of the book, 
questions of the denotation of colour terms are more crucial than questions 
about the ontological status of colour (see above, comment (a) to ch. 3). The 
purpose of the following remarks is to alert the reader to the inevitable 


I. 4 (a) 

problems involved by making them explicit. Supplementary notes related to 
specific occurrences of colour expressions will be found under the appropriate 
paragraph numbers. 1 have indicated the corresponding Latin words when 
these exist in Risner’s text. Terms which, for example, occur only in the first 
three chapters of Book I have no Latin equivalents. 

Of the twenty or so colour names in the Optics some are straightforward 
and require no comment, others are ambiguous, and one or two are proble- 
matic. Words designating attributes or qualifications of colours are on the 
whole more difficult to interpret. Of the colour names used in the first three 
Books, three ( lazawardi , arjawani, zinjari) are of Persian origin, one (Jarfirl , 
thus vowelled in MSS) is Greek; the rest derive from Arabic roots. I have 
adopted the following equivalences: 

abyad/albus = white. Like the Greek leukos the word can be said of opaque 
white surfaces, e.g. the surface of a whitewashed wall ( [26, 48]), and of clear, 
un tinted transparent bodies ([124]). 

ahtnar/rubeus = red. The Latin has rubeus also for arjawanu q. v. 
akhdar/viridis = green. Three shades of green are mentioned: akhdar zari/ 
viridis segetalis = fresh-green, apparently the colour of fresh vegetation 
(I, 6[ 1 1 4] ); akhdar zinjari /viridis myrti (sic) = rust-green; akhdar fustuqi/viridis 
levistici = pistachio-green. For an explanation of the Latin equivalent of the 
second of these terms, see II, 3 [8], note 1; also below: zinjari. 

arjawani (or urjuwdni)/ rubeus = purple. See also farjiri, which seems to refer 
to a similar colour. Al-BIrunl, following Ibn Durayd, describes arjawan (or 
urjuwan) as ‘most intense red’ ( wa huwa ashaddu al-humra ), adding that it is also 
called al-qirmiz (crimson?, scarlet?) — Kitab al-Jamahir , p. 37. 

ashhal! glaucus = grey. One of the ambiguous names. It was frequently used 
as equivalent to the Greek glaukos, grey, blue-grey, blue-green, light blue, etc. 
(LSJ). In the Optics it is mentioned as a colour of the eye (or iris) distinguished 
from blue (azraq) (I, 5 [6] ). I have settled, perhaps a little arbitrarily, on ‘grey’. 

Kamal al-Dln, in Tanqih, 1, p. 106, lists al-shuhla (from ashhal) among four 
colours of the iris, the other three being dark blue or blue-black ( al-kahal ), blue 
(azraq), and al-shu'la; al-shuhla , he says, is closer to al-kahal while al-shula is 
closer to blue. This would seem to make ashhal something like bluish grey, 
but Kamal al-Dln appears to be propounding a theory rather than a descrip- 
tion of actual usage. For another statement in the Tanqih on the gradations 
between white and black ‘by way of’ blue, see vol. n, p. 334. The sequence (is 
this an ordering of blues in the achromatic white-black or light-dark dimen- 
sion?) begins with asmdnjunt (sapphire, hyacinth), followed by firuzaj (tur- 
quoise), lajawardi (lapis lazuli, azure), mil (indigo), and finally kuhli (dark 
blue); for the translation of these terms see Steingass, Persian-English Diction- 
ary. (The statement is a quotation from Qutb al-Dln al-Shirazi’s Commentary 


42 


Commentary 


on the Kulliyyat section in Avicenna’s Kitab al-Qanun. Compare al-Biruni, 
Kitab al-Jamahir, p. 75, where the transition from asmdnjuni to kuhli is presen- 
ted in terms of shab c or saturation.) 
ashqar = blond. 

aswad/niger = black, halik al-sawad = pitch-black. 
asjar = yellow. A face can be ‘yellow’ from fear (I, 3[i34]). 
azraq/viridis (thus in 1 , 5 [6] ) = blue. As is well known, the confusion of blue 
and green was common to many cultures. 

farfiri (or jurfiri , or firfirl) = purpure. An Arabization of the Greek par- 
phyrous , from porphyra , the purple-fish from which the purple dye was 
obtained (LSJ). Farfiri may well denote a colour very similar to that referred to 
by the Persian arjawani, purple; see Badawi, Shuriih ' ala Aristu , p. 292. 

Justuqi, see akhdar Justuqi. 

khamri! vinosus = of the colour of wine. 

kuhli/tinctura obscura = blue-black, or dark blue. Another one of the ambi- 
guous names ( cf. Allan, Persian Metal Technology , pp. 55-58), but the sug- 
gested translation is fairly safe. 

Idzawardi (or lazuwardi)/ caeruleus, lazuleus = lazuline, the colour of lapis 
lazuli. 

misannx , see note on I, 6[i 14]. 

rayhani/viridis myrti = the colour of rayhdn/myrtus , sweet basil. 

see note on I, 6[i 14]. 
urjuwanu see arjawam. 
wardt/roseus = rose. 

zar'x = vegetable-green, ?the same as akhdar zar'x/viridis segetalis. Mentioned 
in II, 3 [203] as one of the bright colours ( al-alwan al-mushriqa) . The Latin has 
viridis for za/i and scintillans for mushriq . 

zinjdri , from Persian zingar, rust, verdigris. See akhdar zinjari. 

As we have seen (above, comment (a) to ch. 3), ‘strong’ ( qawi ) and ‘weak’ 
(da'if), when applied to light, clearly refer to intensity of illumination. As 
applied to colour, however, their meaning is not always clear, though they 
seem in several cases at least to refer to degrees of saturation. For example, 
when I. H. cites dark blue ( kuhli ), wine ( khamri ) and dark green (misanm) as 
strong colours (II, 3 [53]), he appears to be referring to saturated instances of 
these hues. And again, when he speaks of ‘strong-red beverages’ ( ashriba 
qaiviyyat aU^umra — I, 4(22]) he must mean beverages of a deep-red colour 
(probably wines, undiluted) which, he says, appear to lose their transparency 
when placed in dimly lighted places, and regain the clarity ( $aja ’) of their 
colour when irradiated by a ‘strong’ (white) light. A strong colour, in this 
sense, has something in common with a dark imuzlim) colour, and is 


0 



S t MjS 

<4v v T 


* m 


v V \ 



& h'J ■ r% ' 

% \ Nt //... 

Vs», \ • ••/ '• .// 


\\ W= \ 

\ ^%\ ' 


w im 

vi ' \ fi§ 


I f 


1!(P 


r- '*'•■-• c * ' ■ 


i. if? 

i % ; ► I 

*4'lk * - 


\ 


Plate 2 


Tu„,cs „d Humours of the Eye a cco,di„ 6 to Ksmil , !anbllI ^ 

Ahmet in, 3340, fol. 24b 



43 



By permission British Library 

Plate 4 Diagram of the Eye. British Library, London, Royal MS 12. G. VII, fol. i r 


I. 4 (a) 

contrasted with dajf( weak, faint) in the same way as muzlim is opposed to 
raqlq/subtilis . (I. H. in fact goes as far as to say that coloration is a ‘sort of 
darkness’ — II, 3 [54.]). It should be noted, however, that in I, 4(6] purple 
(< arjawani ) and lazuline ( lazawardi ) are mentioned as examples of ‘bright and 
strong’ colours, when irradiated by sunlight. 

In I, 2[i6] ‘bright’ ( mushriqa ) colours are mentioned next to ‘brilliant white’ 
bodies, and, although no examples are given here, they are contrasted with 
dull ( kadira ), earthy ( turabiyya ) and dark (munkasifa) bodies (also I, 2(17] ). 
Later in the book, mushriq as a colour attribute is rendered in the Latin 
translation as scintillans , but it is not certain whether the word always refers to 
a high degree of luminosity. In I, 3(114, 120] and I, 4[2o] we are given a list of 
six ‘bright colours’: farfirl , khamrl , lazawardi , rayhanl , sa e wl and arjawani. In 
I, 3[i 14] ‘brightly coloured’ does not seem to mean intensely illuminated, but 
rather ‘strongly coloured’. The same may be implied in I, 3(120]. Again, in 
I, 4[20], ‘bright colours’ are said to look dull ( kadira ) or clear (safiya) as the light 
shining upon them decreases or increases in intensity. In the same paragraph 
mushriq and safin are also used jointly, as if they mean the same thing. Blue 
(azraq) and green ( akhdar ) are classified ini, 3 [125] as ‘bright and clear’ colours. 
And, as we have just seen, arjawani and lazawardi are considered ‘bright and 
strong’ colours. In all these places I. H. is striving to show how illumination, 
hue and saturation function together in the perceptual experience of colour, 
but, lacking a formal distinction of these variables, his account is necessarily 
difficult to follow and may be at times confused. This is not surprising in a 
pre-nineteenth-century author. The astonishing thing is that I. H. was able to 
maintain a largely consistent analysis without the aid of a system explicitly 
formulated for the characterization of colour attributes. Perhaps his effort 
should be viewed as an early attempt to create such a system. It should be 
noted at any rate that, in terms of scope, details and comprehensiveness of 
treatment, I. H.’s observations on the subject of colour perception are 
unequalled in any single writer before him. 

Another frequently used but less problematic adjective is musfir, from asfara 
(to shine or glow), a verb commonly said of dawn or daybreak. As a colour 
term in the Optics it almost always refers to the quality of ‘paleness’ or 
‘lightness’ or being closer to whiteness, and hence denotes colours of low 
saturation. In a number of places, ‘pale-coloured’ bodies ( ajsam musfirat 
al-alwan) are observed to share with white bodies the ability to show the 
‘strong’ colours of neighbouring objects, especially when the latter are 
strongly illuminated: I, 3(114, 116, 144], 6(95]; III, 7[i2i]. Musfir , rendered in 
the Latin translation as albedinis debilis , is opposed to qawl/fortis , or strong (in 
the sense of being highly saturated) and to kadir/turbidus , translated here as 
dull. In I, 6[i x 3], isfir , the quality of being musfir , seems to denote the clarity 


L 


44 


Commentary 


45 


or distinctness of a colour; and, similarly, in I, 4(21], the verb asfara seems to 
mean to become manifest or distinct or apparent, a quality denied to dull- 
coloured surfaces unless they are irradiated with a strong light. 

I. H. has a word for saturated colours, viz. mushba'a, but uses it only twice, 
in I, 4(23] and III, 5(7], and the word is ignored in the Latin translation. 

I have translated munkasif when applied to colour, as dark. Munkasif is 
sometimes joined, and apparently conflated with, kadir (dull) and turabi 
(earthy), and contrasted with ‘brilliant white’ and ‘bright’ ( mushriq ) (I, 2[i6]; 
also I, 2[ 1 7], 3(90, 93], 6[ioi]). A clear justification of this translation occurs in 
I, 3 [90] where iron mirrors are said to dim (taksif) the light by their dark 
(muzlima) colours (see also I, 6[ioi], note 2). Adkati/jiiscus (dark or dusky) 
seems to denote a deeper degree of ‘darkness’ in a colour than that indicated by 
munkasif — see I, 6[ 1 1 3 ] where adkan occurs in connection with an observation 
relating to colour contrast. 

A more literal translation of the title of this chapter might be: ‘On what 
occurs (ya'rid) between light and sight’. The title in Risner reads: ‘Quod lux 
per se et colores illuminati operantur in visum aliquam operationem’. 

[I] 1. ‘ an observer’: al-nazir , literally, one who looks on or exercises his 
sense of sight, a beholder. 

[5] 1 . That light makes an effect on the eye must have been known of course 
to intromissionists and extramissionists alike. The question is: how did the 
various writers on optics understand the nature of this effect? Ptolemy, an 
extramissionist, in fact went so far as to say that we see light (and colour) 
through their effect upon sight ( uisus , which must correspond to Arabic basar 
and to Greek opsis). He describes this effect (passio) as an illumination (or 
coloration) of the sight, and he notes in this connection the injury suffered by 
the sense of sight as a result of excessive illumination: ‘. . . uidemus unum- 
quodque lucidorum et colorum per passionem que fit in uisu; . . . Passio 
quidem que in uisu fit, est illuminatio aut Colorado. Illuminatio autem sola, in 
luminibus, est quedam de superhabundantiis habitudinum, et ideo nocet et 
ledit sensum’ ( Ptol . Opt., 11, 23; quoted by Lejeune, Euclide et Ptolemee, p. 29, 
n. 5, who takes ‘uisus’ here to refer, not to the eye, but to the visual ray or 
visual cone). Galen, another upholder of one version of the visual-ray 
hypothesis, cites the hindrance of sight by sudden, strong illumination as 
evidence for, not against, that hypothesis: the intense light from outside 
quenches the gentler light flowing into the eyes from the brain (On the 
Usejulness of the Parts of the Body , ed. May, pp. 473-74). See note on I, 6[67]; 
also I, 7 [i6]. 


I- 5 M 

[8] 1. Beginning of ‘Chapter 2’ (in Bk I) in Risner’s edition. See Introduc- 
tion, sec. V. 

[11] 1. ‘designs’. See I, 2(72], note 1. 

[20] 1. Beginning of ‘Chapter 3’ (in Bk I) in Risner’s edition. See Introduc- 
tion, sec. V. 

[21] I. ‘ their colours become clear and manifest’: safat alwanuha wa asfarat/ 
?clarescunt. On isfir as an attribute of colour, see comment (a) to Bk I, ch. 4; 
also [22], note 1. 

[22] I. ‘their colours become clear and bright’: safat alwanuha wa ashraqat/ 
clarescunt colores eorum. See [21], note 1. 

[23] 1 ‘transparent stones of saturated colours’: alfawdhir al-mushijfa al - 
mushba'at al-alwan, i.e. of deep or intense colours. See III, 5 [7], note 3. 

[25] i-' ‘the cloth called abu qalamun . The word means ‘originally a certain 
textile of a peculiar sheen, then a stone, a bird, and a mollusc. The origin of the 
word is not certain; the unanimous statement of the Arab philologists that Abu 
Kalamtin is a Byzantine product would indicate the derivation of the word 
from Greek’ (A. J. W. Huisman in El [I] 2 , I, p. 13 1). Elsewhere in the Optics ‘ abu 
qalamun refers to the chameleon, the reptile known in Greek as chamailedn, 
and mentioned also in Ptolemy’s Optica; see II, 3 [218) and note 1. 

Olympiodorus, in the ‘Commentary’ ( Tafsxr ) attributed to him on Aristot- 
le’s Meteorology , makes the remark that because colours appear to change with 
the light illuminating them, weavers of ‘multi-coloured clothes’ prefer not to 
do their weaving in the light of a lamp ‘for fear of using one colour in place of 
another’, and for the same reason people avoid buying clothes and precious 
stones at certain times of the day (Badawl, ed., Shuruh 'ala Aristu, p. 155). 


chapter 5 

a. The geometrization oj the eye 

I. H. declares at the end of this chapter that ‘all’ of what he has mentioned of 
the eye’s coats and humours and of their composition ‘has been shown by 
anatomists in the books on anatomy’ ([39]). This statement and the repeated 
use of ‘it is said that . . .’([2, 11, 14]) clearly indicate that he does not claim to 
offer a new description of the general anatomy of the eye. His intention in this 
chapter was not to report the results of new observations, but to propose a 
definite geometrical arrangement for certain parts of the eye in preparation for 
the theory explained in Chapter 6. To the extent, however, that critical 
features of this arrangement were determined by the new theory, the account 
presented in Chapter 5 must itself be regarded as new. That the account could 
not be correct in all details should be expected, not only because it relied on an 


Commentary 


47 


46 

imperfect understanding of the eye’s anatomy, but because it was further 
constrained by the requirements of a theory which had its own limitations. 

I. H. ’s enumeration and description of the parts of the eye are not, in fact, as 
complete or as detailed as in the writings of Galen and his Arabic followers. He 
counts the following coats or tunics (sing, tabaqa, layer) and humours (sing. 
rutuba) ([5-12]): (1) The conjunctiva ( al-multahima/consolidativa , epipephykds 
chiton ), a white grease that fills the concavity of the bone where the eye is set. 
(2) The uvea, or grape-like tunic ( al-tabaqa al-'inabiyy a/ tunica uvea, rhagoeides 
chiton ), described as a hollow sphere, is attached to the conjunctiva and 
occupies a position close to the front of the eyeball. (3) A circular aperture 
(pupil) in the front surface of the uveal sphere is covered by the cornea 
(al-qarniyy a! cornea, keratoeides chiton), a hard and transparent layer. (4) The 
crystalline humour (< al-rutuba al-jalidiyya/humor glacialis, krystalloeides hygron) 
lies within the uveal sphere, to the interior surface of which it is attached. 
(5) The space between the cornea and the anterior surface of the crystalline is 
filled with a white, fluid body, the albugineous (aqueous) humour (al-rutuba 
al-bay diyy a/humor albugineus, ooeides hygron). 

I. H. describes the crystalline body as a sphere consisting of two parts of 
different transparencies — one part, towards the front, is the crystalline 
proper, and the other, towards the back, is (6) the vitreous humour ( al-rutuba 
al-zujdjiyy a/humor vitreus, hyaloeides hygron) ([12]). These two parts are 
together enclosed in (7) a tenuous cobweb-like membrane called ‘aranea’ 
(arachnoid membrane) (al- e ankabutiyya/tela aranea, arachnoeides chitdn), being 
similar in texture to a spider’s web. 

This characterization of the crystalline has elicited the following, apparently 
critical, comment from Kamal al-DIn: ‘This description differs from that of all 
the physicians whose account of [ocular] anatomy has come down to us, all of 
them being in agreement that the crystalline in its entirety is a single substance 
of uniform transparency, and that the vitreous is a third humour [positioned 
after the aqueous and crystalline humours] that fills the cavity of the nerve 
behind the crystalline up to the aperture in the eye’s socket’ (Tanqfy, I, p. 55; 
quoted by Na?if, al-Hasan, p. 207). Kamal al-Dln’s remark is correct, the 
traditional view derived from Galen being that the crystalline ‘sphere’ is 
immersed to its equator into the vitreous humour (cj. Galen, On the Usefulness 
of the Parts of the Body , trans. May, p. 468; Hunayn, Book of the Ten Treatises on 
the Eye, ed. Meyerhof, p. 76, lines 13-15 [Arabic], p. 6, lines 23-25 [English]). 

Not mentioned by name in I. H.’s account are the choroid tunic ( al - 
mashimiyya , chorioeides chitdn) and the sclera ( al-$ulba , skleros chitdn ); but these 
are of course the ‘two layers’ of the optic nerve, said in [2] to take their origins 
from the two membranes of the brain ( i.e.pia mater and dura mater , respec- 
tively) and, having entered the eye’s orbit, spread out like a funnel on which 


I- 5 (a) 

the eyeball is mounted ([3]). Also absent from this chapter (and from 
Chapter 7) is any explicit mention of the retina, or net-like tunic ( al - 
shabakiyya, amphiblestroeides chitdn), obviously because it plays no part in the 
visual process. 

Two hollow nerves, growing off from two points on the front of the brain, 
unite at a middle point (thus forming the optic chiasma or ‘common nerve’: 
al-'asaba al-mushtaraka/nervus communis), after which they separate again, and, 
having entered through apertures into the orbits, diverge, each in the shape of 
a funnel in which the eye is set. The conjunctiva fastens upon the equator of 
the uvea, thus holding it in place, and embraces the uvea’s surface except for a 
tiny area at the front. The crystalline sphere, eccentrically placed within the 
uvea towards its front surface, is set in the cavity of the nerve, the circular 
extremity of which surrounds the middle of the crystalline. The crystalline 
joins the uvea at this circle; the conjunctiva fastens upon the extremity of the 
nerve where it joins the uvea and the crystalline, thus holding all three of them 
together. The junction of all these coats is called ‘the joining circle’ (dairat 
al-iltiham / circulus consolidationis). This is Galen’s ‘wreath’ or ‘iris’ (ciliary 
region), which is not to be confused with what is now called ‘iris’ (cf Galen, 
On the Usefulness of the Parts of the Body , trans. May, pp. 467-69). 

Anticipating the theory set forth in Chapter 6, I. H. explains how the 
surfaces of the various coats and humours stand in relation to one another. His 
rather convoluted descriptions can be much simplified by reference to Figure 
C. I. 11, drawn after one proposed by Nazlf ( al-Hasan , p. 211). The figure at 
the end of Book I, re-drawn from MS Fatih 3212, would be hopeless as an aid 
for understanding the geometrical arrangement painstakingly detailed in 
I. H.’s text. 

The interior surface of the cornea, which is part of a sphere larger than that 
of the uvea, cuts the latter in the circumference of a circle marking the aperture 
(or pupil) in the uvea’s front surface. The centre C of the larger sphere will be 
situated behind the centre U of the uvea, and both centres will lie on a line 
drawn from the middle of the pupil. It is assumed that this line passes through 
a point in the middle of the nerve’s cavity. Call C ‘the centre of the eye’ or 
‘centre of vision’, and the line through C and U ‘the visual axis’ (or ‘axis of 
symmetry’). 

It is further assumed that the anterior, ‘flattened’ surface of the crystalline 
humour c is part of a large sphere which intersects the uveal sphere and the 
posterior surface of the crystalline itself in the circumference of a circle called 
‘the circle of intersection’ ( circulus sectionis ). I. H. allows the circle of intersec- 
tion to be either in the plane of ‘the joining circle’ (ciliary region) or only 
parallel to it. The centre of the crystalline’s anterior surface will be situated 
behind U, and it is ‘more likely than not’ (al-ashbah! melius est) that it should be 


48 


Commentary 



Figure C. I. i i 


identical with C ( [29] ) . On these suppositions all surfaces positioned before U 
will be parallel to one another, and the line through C and U will be 
perpendicular to all of them. 

As for the surface of separation v between the crystalline and vitreous 
humours, it is considered to be either plane or part of a large sphere the centre 
of which is the same as the centre C of the eye (see II, 2(9]). Figure C. I. n 
represents a particular case of the latter possibility, namely the case in which 
the comparatively large spherical surface v is concave towards the pupil; but 
the contrary case is not excluded. I. H. does not claim to know the exact shape 
of the interface v y but he is convinced (as is made clear in Chapter 6 and in 
Bk II, ch. 2) that it is one of the shapes that cause the impinging rays to turn 
away from the centre C, which indeed would be compatible with any of the 
possibilities here envisaged by him. His assumption would require that 
refraction at the surface v should take place towards the normal to that surface, 
which in turn implies that the density of the vitreous is greater than that of the 
crystalline proper. The whole argument clearly illustrates the extent to which 
I.H.’s description of the eye’s anatomy and physiology is determined by 
considerations belonging to his theory of vision. 

All coats and humours of the eye are held together, in the manner described 
above, so that they never change their positions relative to one another or to 
the middle of the nerve’s cavity, regardless of how the eye is oriented and 
regardless of whether it moves or is at rest. 


I. 5 (a) 


49 



Figure C. I. 12 


Structure of the Eye according to Kamal al-Din 

1. Vitreous humour. 6. Albugineous humour. 

2. Centre of the eye. 7. Uveal sphere 

3. Crystalline humour. 8. Cornea. 

4. Centre of the uvea. 9. Uveal aperture (pupil). 

5. Web-like tunic, encircling the 10. Wreath, 

crystalline humour. 1 1 . Retina. 

The figure is a partial imitation of one found in Kamal al-Din’s Tanqth , Istanbul 
MSS Ahmet III 3340 (dated a.h. 716/A.D. 1316), p. 24b; Ayasofya 2598 (dated 
a.h. 1079/A.D. 1669), p. 72; and Tehran MS Majlis-i Shura-i Milll 2451 (dated 
a.h. 1096/A.D. 1685), p. 32a. 

In all three MSS, 2 is called ‘centre of the crystalline humour and of the eye’. The 
Ahmet III MS and the Tehran MS show only one point inside the crystalline body 


50 


Commentary 


5i 


which in the Ahmet III MS is called ‘centre of the crystalline humour’, and, in the 
Tehran MS, ‘centre of the uvea’. In addition to this confusion the figures in all three 
MSS fail to show the geometrical arrangement of the eye’s tunics according to 
I. H. ’s theory of vision, which Kamal al-Din accepts. The main feature of the figure 
is the representation of the crystalline humour as one sphere immersed in the 
vitreous humour and not as a composite crystalline-vitreous body (as in I. H.). 

Here the surface of the cornea and portions of the forward surfaces of the uvea 
and crystalline have been flattened a little so as to share the same centre of curvature 
at 2, the centre of the eye. Thus radial lines drawn from the common centre 2 are all 
perpendicular to the cornea and the front surfaces of the uvea and crystalline. 2 can 
therefore be described as the centre of curvature of the forward surface of the 
crystalline humour — which may explain the designation of this point in the three 
MSS. 

The posterior surface of the crystalline has also been re-drawn as part of a large 
sphere, at which the incoming rays are refracted away from the common centre 2. 

There is no corresponding diagram in the undated Leiden MS, Or. 201 (see 
above. Introduction, n. 115). 

Clearly unsatisfied with I. H.’s sparing description of ocular anatomy, 
Kamal al-DIn devotes many pages ( Tanqih , 1, pp. 61-111) to a detailed and 
critical survey of a large number of Arabic medical sources which included 
translations of Galen’s De usu partium (in a commentary by Ibn Abl $adiq, died 
after 1068) and De anatomicis administrationibus . The result is a richer descrip- 
tion of the eye than is found in I. H. ’s book. The diagram produced by Kamal 
al-Din at the end of his lengthy exposition (Figure C. I. 12) was thus intended 
to represent his own understanding of what he had gathered from his many 
sources, rather than what he learnt from Kitab al-Mana%ir. 

Despite the differences pointed out by Kamal al-Din, and there are others 
that may be added to them, some similarities exist between the ocular 
geometries of Galen and I. H. Galen says, for example, that the crystalline, 
though generally of a round shape, is not a perfect sphere (On the Usefulness of 
the Parts of the Body , trans. May, pp. 468, 479), and he states that the pupil lies 
‘in a straight line with the whole root of the eye where the nerve begins to be 
resolved’ (ibid., p.499); and, further, that the surface of the crystalline is 
flattened so as to have more points in communication with the object than a 
more convex surface (ibid., pp. 502-03). But there is no precise statement in 
Galen about the geometrical disposition of the tunics’ surfaces or of their 
centres of curvature. Nor, it seems, would Galen’s theory of visual rays have 
had much use for such a statement. In the case of I. H.’s Optics , the geo- 
metrical specifications in regard to these surfaces and their centres are essential 
requirements of a new theory aiming to explain how a ‘form’ or image 
faithfully replicating the distribution of light and colour on the object’s surface 


1 * 5 [25] 

is realized within the eye. (On this last point see: Na?If, al-Hasan , pp. 211-16; 
Schramm, ‘Entwicklung’, p. 296; also Crombie, ‘Mechanistic Hypothesis’, 

P-22.) 

[6] 1. ‘black in most cases or blue or grey in some eyes ’ : saw da \ ft al-akthar wa 
zarqa ’ wa shahid 3 ji ba'd al-ab$ar/ nigra ut plurimum, et viridis [sic], et glauca in 
quibusdam oculis. 

[ 9 ] I - ‘ delicate’: tarifa (?soft), a property said in I, 7[s] to make an organ 
more receptive to sensation. The Latin happily hits on the meaning intended 
( receptibilis humiditatis formarum visibilium — R 3:58) while rendering the word 
in the later occurrence (in I, 7(5] ) as subtilis . 

[10] 1. ‘ crushed glass’: al-zujaj al-mardud/vitrum Jrustatum. In Galen the 
vitreous humour is likened to fused or liquefied glass (On the Usejidness of the 
Parrs of the Body , trans. May, p. 464; Hunayn’s Arabic translation of De usu 
partium has ‘like glass when melted [ dhaba ] by heat’ [MS Escorial 850, p. 17b], 
and the same word is used in his Ten Treatises , ed. Meyerhof, p. 74, 1 . 13 
[Arabic] and p. 4, 11 . 19—20 [English]). Al-zujaj al-dha 3 ib , melted glass, is the 
phrase also found in the Arabic version of Bk X of Galen’s De anatomicis 
administrationibus ( e Amal al-tashrih ), ed. Simon, 11, p. 35. I. H.’s text is the only 
one known to me that uses mardud instead of dha 3 ib or mudhab. 

[10] 2. See above, comment (a) to this chapter. 

[11] i.‘ in the anterior part of the uvea’s concavity’: wa fi sadr muqa"ar 
al- e inabiyya/Et in posteriore [sic] parte concavitatis sphaerae uveae R4:5-6/Et in 
pectore concauitatis uuee L x (fol. 4 V 23), L 2 (fol. 2 r B52). 

[14] i- 1 it confers the visual power upon it’: ‘confers’ translates fa-tu'tiha , the 
correct reading in all Arabic manuscripts and in the Latin version (R 4:20). E 
mistakenly reads fa-tughattfha (129:16). I owe this correction to Bruce 
Eastwood. 

[23] 1. ‘the opening in the forepart of the nerve’. A t (faithfully reproduced 
in E) has ‘uvea’ instead of ‘nerve’. Some of the Latin versions seem to reflect 
puzzlement over this reading: ‘quoniam foramen quod est in anteriori uveae 
est oppositum foramini quod est in posteriore parte uveae’ R 5:9-10, L 2 
(fol. 3 r A4-7)/‘quoniam foramen quod est in anteriori uuee est oppositum 
foramini quod est in pectore uuee’ L, (fol. 5 V 18-20). 

[24] 1. ‘the two surfaces of the crystalline’, i.e. the anterior, flattened surface 
and the posterior surface of the crystalline-vitreous body forming part of a 
smaller sphere. 

[25] The whole purpose of the long argument in this paragraph is to 
establish that the line j oimng the centre of the uveal sphere and the centre of the 
crystalline’s surface also passes through the centre of the ‘joining circle’. 


11 


52 


Commentary 


[35] 1. ‘But if the position of this line . . . until it reaches that bend’. A t and 
E read: ‘But if the position of this line does not change in relation to the joining 
circle, and if the surface of the nerve's cavity from the joining surface to the 
point where the nerve bends does not change position with respect to the 
surface of the nerve's cavity until it reaches that bend, then the line passing 
through the centres of the eye’s coats goes through the centre of the joining 
circle and is perpendicular to it [the circle]’. The English translation has been 
emended in the light of Risner’s version: ‘Et cum situs lineae non mutetur 
apud circulum consolidationis, neque superficies concavitatis nervi, quae est a 
loco circumferentiae circuli consolidationis usque ad locum declinationis, 
mutet suum situm apud circulum consolidationis, ista ergo linea non mutat 
suum situm apud concavitatem nervi, quousque perveniat ad locum 
declinationis’. 

[39] 1. The picture shown with the translated text is so drawn as to 
correspond closely to the diagram in MS Fatih 3212, fol. 8 1 b; see Plate 1 . For a 
new diagrammatic representation of the eye according to I. H.’s descriptions, 
see comment (a) to this chapter. 

CHAPTER 6 

Here, in Chapter 6, the argument of Bk I finally reaches its apex. It is first 
asserted as having been already demonstrated that vision is mediated through 
the forms made up ( mumtazija/ admixtae ) of the light and colour that reach the 
eye from the object seen ([1-3]). Since light and colour are themselves forms 
that exist in the object as essential or accidental properties of it (see note on 
I, 1 [4]), I. H. must be understood as saying that what the eye receives are 
replicas, likenesses or images of the forms as properties. I. H. in fact uses 
‘form’ in a variety of senses throughout his book, and it will be useful to 
introduce here some distinctions that will help in clarifying as well as 
shortening his argument. 

According to I. H.’s principle of punctiform analysis (see comment (b) to 
Bk I, ch. 3) we may regard the surface of a visible object as an aggregate of 
point-forms of light and colour each of which is a physical property (whether 
inherent/essential or temporary/accidental) of a single point or a very small 
part of the object's surface. Let us refer to a point-form considered as a 
physical property by the abbreviation ‘f p ’ (form-as-property) . To say that a 
point-form f p exists at a certain point P on the luminous surface of a coloured 
object will simply mean that P is a coloured and luminous point. We may then 
introduce the concept of form as point-image — as follows: a point-image f of 
a luminous point P will exist at any point I if and only if I lies on the path of 
radiation of light (and colour) from P. In most cases, the path of radiation 


I. 6 53 

from P is the path of rectilinear, reflected or refracted radiation from P. (Note 
that fi is also a point-form f p of point /, being what I. H. would call an 
accidental form, or property, of point /.) 

I. H. often uses the expression ‘form of an object' to refer to the pattern of 
point-forms f p '$ as these are displayed on the object’s visible surface; let us call 
form in this sense ‘M p ’. M p is simply a visible array of light and colour. An 
image of such a total form or array may then be called ‘Mi’. M t will be a distinct 
image of M p only if there is one-to-one correspondence between the point- 
images ffs that make up and the point-forms f p ’s that make up M p . Thus, 
from every point on a shining surface, lines can be drawn to a single point I in 
front of that surface. But the image at I will not be a distinct image of the 
surface; rather, it will be an accumulation of point-images, or a confused 
image, of all points on the surface. On the other hand, the image projected by 
a pin-hole camera will be a distinct image consisting of the point-images to be 
found on the straight lines drawn from all points on the object’s surface 
through the camera's aperture. (In the context of I. H.'s theory of vision, and 
for reasons to be explained later, we shall use the abbreviation ‘M s ’ to 
designate a total ‘distinct’ image Mi within the visual apparatus — see 
comment (b) to Bk II, under sura/forma.) 

Clearly under the influence of Galen’s widespread views I. H. takes the 
crystalline humour to be the sensitive part of the eye, or, as he put it more 
specifically, it is at the crystalline that visual sensation ‘begins’ ([14]; II, 2[io]). 
To know what he means by this is to know what role he assigns to the 
crystalline in the process by which the forms or images arriving at its forward 
surface are channelled to the brain where, as he also asserts, the sensation is 
‘completed’ ([68]; II, 2(4 ff]). 

The structure of I. H. 's argument is determined by the question he proposes 
to answer — which is: what are the conditions that would make normal, 
distinct vision possible? He was aware of the fact that the crystalline humour is 
a semi-transparent body which must generally refract ( i.e . bend the direction 
of) the lights and colours that impinge on its surface. Now, I. H. argues 
([31-39]), if the crystalline, as a sentient organ, were to register, for convey- 
ance to the brain, all refracted as well as unrefracted point-images that pass 
through its forward surface, the brain would ultimately receive a confused 
impression of the object as a whole. This, however, would be contrary to 
normal experience. I. H. therefore concludes that only point-images that 
correspond one-to-one with point-forms on the object's surface can be sensed 
or registered by the crystalline. This select class of point-images consists of all 
images that enter the crystalline along lines perpendicular to its forward 
surface. These are of course the lines of the visual cone whose base is the visible 
object and whose apex is the centre of the eye (which is the same as the centre 


54 


Commentary 


55 


of curvature of the crystalline’s front surface). I. H.’s statement that sensation 
begins at the crystalline may thus be understood to mean that it is at the 
crystalline that the point-images to be ultimately recorded by the brain are first 
selected. Understood in this way, the statement has no precedent in Galen or 
in any other writer. 

The fact of distinct vision leads I. H. to consider only the optical image M, 
consisting of the point-images that proceed from points on the object along 
the radial lines; for, to him, only such a total image can be said to represent 
the optical pattern M p on the object’s surface. The representative image Mj 
first arrives at the corneal surface through which it passes, unrefracted and 
undistorted though gradually diminished in size, until it strikes the parallel 
forward surface of the crystalline humour. Many point-images, other than 
those travelling along the radial lines, will of course also reach the corneal 
surface, and these will proceed on refracted lines to the crystalline’s surface 
where they will mingle with point-images arriving along perpendiculars to 
this surface. Further mingling and consequent confusion will occur when the 
already refracted images are refracted again as they pass through the crystal- 
line’s forward surface. To save the fact of distinct vision I. H. assumes that, as 
well as being a semi-transparent body that refracts the light and accompany- 
ing colour according to the rules of refraction, the crystalline is also endowed 
with a sentient power that operates according to its own rules. As he makes 
clear in several places, his assumption amounts to postulating that sensation 
(as distinguished from mere optical propagation) is transmitted through the 
crystalline humour only on certain privileged lines which are none other than 
the radial lines (see no te on II, 2 [ 1 1 ] ) . 

There is another fact to be saved, namely the fact that perceived images are 
upright as well as normally distinct, which indicates to I. H. that the lines that 
guide the transmission of image must not intersect inside the eye before they 
reach the optic nerve. This suggests to him other assumptions that govern the 
mode of transmission of images across the various layers of the eye and 
through the optic nerve (see opening comment to Bk II, ch. 2). 

In an attempt to answer a possible objection against the apparent ad hoc 
character of these assumptions, especially the one stipulating that sight 
‘receives’ (records) only the forms (images) that reach the eye along lines 
perpendicular to its surface, I. H. draws attention to analogous situations in 
nature: that light, when not interfered with, will extend only in straight lines 
and not in, say, curved lines; that heavy bodies naturally fall in straight lines 
perpendicular to the earth’s surface; and that heavenly bodies move only in 
regular circles; indeed, says I. H., all natural movements seem to be especially 
tied to lines of certain shapes ([43]), and the movement of visual sensation is 
no exception. 


I. 6 [52] 

[24] See note on II, 2[i 1]. 

[ 34 ] Let the two concentric arcs c and h represent the parallel surfaces of the 
cornea and the crystalline humour, respectively (Fig. C. I. 13). Let AP , BP be 
two rays that lie on the same side of the perpendicular r drawn to both surfaces 
from the common centre of curvature (i.e. centre of the eyeball); and let the 
rays meet at a single point Pon c. Then the positions of the rays relative to the 
perpendicular will be reversed after being refracted at P; and so will be the 
positions of the forms/images projected through them on the crystalline’s 
surface. The latter result is but a consequence of the fact that the incident and 
refracted rays rotate in the same sense. 



[ 4 1] i* ‘Thus if sight senses the visible object . . . must be one common 
point’. Omitted in A t and E. The translation is from Risner’s text (12:53-55): 
‘Si ergo sensus visus rerum visarum est formis venientibus ad ipsum ex 
coloribus rerum visarum et lucibus earum, et hoc distincte, oportet ut 
centrum superficiei visus et centrum superficiei glacialis sit unum punctum 
commune’. 

[42] i.‘ drawn from the centres’, i.e. from the centres considered as one. 
The word is in the plural form both in A l and R. 

[42] 2. ‘ what come to it of the forms of visible objects’. Reading suwar for 
daw' (in A t and E 152:15). R: ea, quae veniuntad se ex formis rerum. 

[ 52 ] i.‘ reaches the visible object’. A T and E have: wa yantahi ila al-basar 
(reaches the eye). R correctly reads pervenientes ad rem visam. 


56 


Commentary 


S7 


[57] 1. ‘ Now it is evident that’. Reading wa huwa bayyinun anna in place of 
E’s and A r ’s wa huwa bayyinun li-anna. 

[61] 1. ‘but only by inference and signs’: wa innama yudrikuha bi-qiyasin wa 
amaratin/sed per rationem et signa . 

[65] On the selective sensitivity of the crystalline humour, see note to 
II, 2[ll]. 

[67] Sensation in the crystalline humour as a species of pain. Theophrastus, in De 
sensibus , 27 ff., ascribed to Anaxagoras the view that ‘every perception is 
accompanied by pain’ (hapasan d’aisthesin meta lypes) and considered the view a 
consequence of the Anaxagoran doctrine that sensation was the operation of 
unlike upon unlike: ‘for everything unlike produces pain by its contact; and 
the presence of pain becomes clear either from too long a duration or from an 
excess of sensation’ (Kirk, Raven and Schofield, The Presocratic Philosophers , 
pp. 383-84; see Stratton, Theophrastus and the Greek physiological Psychology 
before Aristotle , pp. 80-81, 90-93). Strongly reminiscent of Anaxagoras’ 
unusual pronouncement (it ran counter to hitherto received opinion and was 
much criticized in antiquity — Guthrie, A History of Greek Philosophy , 11, 
pp. 318-19) is I. H.’s statement in this paragraph that the effect of light in the 
crystalline humour is of the nature of pain ( min jins al-alam: of the [same] genus 
[as] pain), even when the effect is so mild as not to be felt as pain. Note, 
however, that I. H. also points out, in [81], that the sensation in the eye is not 
merely a sensation of pain but also of luminosity and colour and order, and 
that sensation of these properties is not of the nature of pain. He accordingly 
rejects the suggestion that the mode of transmission of visual sensation from 
the eye to the brain might be analogous to the transmission of pain or of tactile 
sensations. (This has to be I. H. ’s view despite the assertion in II, 2(14] that the 
extension of form through the vitreous and through the sentient body that 
permeates the optic nerve ‘resembles the extension of touch and of pain to the 
last sentient’.) 

It is relevant to mention that among the writings of Theophrastus which, 
according to Ibn al-Nadlm, were rendered into Arabic, one was entitled ‘On 
Sense and the Sensible Object’ ( Kitdb aUHiss wa aPmahsiis), in four books (sic), 
translated by Ibrahim ibn Bakus ( Fihrist , 1, p. 252). The work was known in 
Greek by slightly different titles, one of which. Peri aistheseos kai peri aisthetdn 
(Stratton, p. 15, n. 1), closely corresponds to the title cited by Ibn al-Nadlm. 
Only a fragment of the Greek text of De sensibus has survived and no copies of 
the Arabic translation are known to be extant. According to Diogenes 
Laertius, De sensibus ( Peri aistheseon ), consisted of only one book, but another 
‘On Vision’, Peri opseds , comprised four books (Loeb edition, 1, 1959, pp. 488, 
500). This might give rise to the question as to which of these two works was 
in fact translated into Arabic. 


I. 6 [114] 

[68] 1. ‘The most that the eye does . . . and convey to the last sentient’: wa 
ghayat al-basar, etc./quoniam visus recipit formas rerum visarum et reddit eas sentienti 
ultimo. The Latin misses the point that the transmission (of sensation) is all that 
the eye can do. 

[68] 2. ‘extends into the crystalline’s body’: extenditur in corpore glacialis. A r 
and E read: tamtaddu fi sath alfalldiyya (extends into the crystalline’s surface). 

[68] 3. ‘the last sentient’: al-hass al-akhir / ultimum sentiens. For the translation 
of this expression, see general comments (a) and (b) to Bk II. 

[95] i- Seel, 3 [48 ff-] 

[100] 1. ‘dominates over’, here and in [101, 103, 107-110, 115] translates 
istazhara 'aid. The Latin uses vincere and superare , and renders isti^har by 
victoria. 

[100] 2. ‘colours and dyes’: aUalwan wa al-asbagh. 

[101] I. ‘ coming along with them’, allati taridu ma'aha , which the Latin 
renders as: quae venit ad ipsum cum ea. But the correction is required by the 
context of the sentence. 

[101] 2. ‘ then the form only eclipses the whiteness of that body and reduces 
it, thus [acting] like a shadow’: fa-itmama taksifu tilka aP^uratu bayada dhalika 
alfismi faqat wa tunqisu minhu wa takunu ka-al-zilli. 

[102] 1. ‘ the form ... is bright’: al-siira . . . musfira / . . . albedinis debilis. 
Musfira is here contrasted with muzlima , dark. See III, 7[i2i], note 1. 

[104] 1. ‘more dominant’: azhar, which I take here to be related to isti^har , 
the dominance of one form over another, rather than to zuhur, mere appearing 
or visibility. See [100], note 1. 

‘dark-coloured paint’: al-$ibgh al-adkan. 

[H 3 l 2 -‘ distinctive quality’: isfar. A little later in the same paragraph I 
render musfir aUlawn as pale-coloured, the usual translation; see above, 
comment (a) to ch. 4. The Latin avoids translating the Arabic term in both 
occurrences. The whole paragraph reads in Risner’s text as follows: ‘Et 
occultatio formarum debilis lucis propter vicinitatem lucis fortis habet simile 
in coloribus; quoniam color fuscus si intingatur cum corpore albo punctatim, 
apparebunt ipsa puncta nigra propter fortitudinem albedinis; et sieadem puncta 
fuerint posita supra corpora valde nigra, apparebunt fere alba, et non apparebit 
obscuritas quae est in eis. Et quando ilia tinctura fuerit in corporibus quae non 
sunt multum alba neque multum nigra, apparebit color secundum esse’. 

[114] 1. ‘Similarly . . . two extremes’. This short but important paragraph 
on chromatic contrast is made somewhat difficult to interpret by the use of 
two unfamiliar colour names: $a'wi and misannu The ambiguous kuhlT (?dark 
blue) is also used, adding further to the difficulty. It seems certain that I. H. is 
concerned to describe the effect of simultaneous contrast on hue ; what is not 
clear, however, is the precise nature of this effect. 


58 


Commentary 


59 


With regard to sa'wi, all that we have to go by is the information provided 
by the Arabic classical dictionaries that sa 'w is a small bird of the sparrow kind 
( f w$/iir), which has a red ( ahrnar ) head (Ibn Manzur, Lisdn al-'Arab , and Lane’s 
Arabic-English Lexicon , s.v.). $a'u/i would then be the particular shade of ‘red’ 
associated with this bird. The experiment described by I. H. would suggest, 
perhaps, a yellowish red or a reddish yellow. The same colour is listed in 
I, 3[ii4] as one of four ‘bright colours’ (the other three being purple, purpure 
and the green of sweet basil), but without further specification of its quality 
(see comment (a) to ch. 4 above). 

The colour misanni is slightly less difficult to make out. In II, 3 [53] it is 
mentioned as a ‘strong colour’, in a class with dark blue (kuhli) and the colour 
of wine. The Latin translation of this passage has only two names correspond- 
ing to these three, viz. viriditas projunda et juscitas. One of the two names must 
correspond to misanni , since wine-colour ( khamrt ) could not have been 
mistaken for another colour and it is rendered elsewhere in the Optics as 
vinosus ; but it cannot be certain which one, because viridis could render azraq 
(blue) and viriditas could correspond to khudra (greenness) — see the Arabic- 
Latin Glossaries. I would, however, venture the guess that it is fuscitas that 
translates misanni in this instance, but this is no more than a guess. 

In MS Fatih 3213, fol. 41a, line 1, al-misanni , is written al-m( )sanrii, thus 
lacking the first vowel. The word is vowelled in MS Fatih 3212, fol. 128a, 
line 10 so as to read masanniyan or masaniyyan, depending on where one locates 
the shadda sign which is visible above the line between the nun and the ya. But 
since neither masann nor mason is attested elsewhere, the word must be read 
misanniyyan , an attribution to hajar al-misann , the stone commonly used for 
sharpening blades, and also serving when powdered as a medicine for 
strengthening the eye and treating leucoma and frequently listed among the 
simple drugs ('All ibn 'Isa, Tadhkirat al-kalihalin , p. 379). Two kinds of the 
stone were known: one, that was bathed in water (and known as misann 
al-ma) before being used for sharpening, had a grey colour and was accord- 
ingly called al-aghbar or dust-coloured; the other was dressed with oil and 
known by a name indicating its ‘green’ colour: al-akhdar. It is a reasonable 
guess that misanni as a name of colour in our text is related to the shade of green 
of this latter kind. 

In his Kitab al-lfada wa al-i'tibar , the twelfth-century scholar 'Abd al-Latff 
al-Baghdadl mentions ‘ al-misann incidentally in his account of the Egyptian 
flora, comparing its colour to that of the labakh tree (acacia, memosa lebbec) and 
to the colour of dates in the second stage of their ripeness called khalal that 
comes after the stage called tal c and before the stage called balah. He further 
describes the colour of the misann as saturated green (mushba' al-khudra) (de 
Sacy, Relation de VEgypte, p. 17, andp. 74, n. <I9>). (The misann stone and its 


I. 7 


‘green’ colour are mentioned in Kitab al-Ahjar li-Aristdtalis ; see Ruska, Das 
Steinbuch des Aristoteles, pp. 114, 165-66, no. 32; on misann al-ma see Dubler 
and Teres, La ‘ Materia Medica’ de Dioscorides , 11, p. 438, no. 128.) 

I. H. is thus saying that patterns or designs in a fresh- or light-green colour 
will appear a reddish (?or yellowish) hue when viewed against a dark-blue 
background, and they will look dark- or saturated green when the back- 
ground is a clear yellow. 

The Latin translation of this paragraph departs significantly from the Arabic 
text. Here it is in full as it appears in R 20:31-33, L! (fol. I9 r 16-19), and with 
two minor variations inL 2 (fol. io v B16-20): ‘Et similiter quando color viridis 
segetalis fuerit super corpus citrinum, apparebit ilia tinctura obscura; et 
quando fuerit in corpore nigro, apparebit ilia tinctura similis colori origani. Et 
similiter est omnis tinctura media inter duas extremitates’. 

(The minor variations in L 2 consist in replacing the second ‘apparebit’ by ‘et 
fuerit’ in the first sentence, and in omitting ‘est’ in the last sentence.) 

The degree to which this differs from the Arabic can be seen from the 
following comparisons: 


fresh-green : akhdar zari 

dark-blue body : jism kuhli 
reddish/ yellowish : sa r wi 


: viridis segetalis 
: corpus citrinum 
: tinctura obscura 


clear-yellow body : jism sdji al-sujra : corpus nigrum 

saturated green : misanni : tinctura similis colori origani 

The Latin changes the character of the contrast completely: a certain shade of 
green ( viridis segetalis) appears darker ( tinctura obscura) on a yellow ground 
(corpus citrinum) , while the same green, on a black ground (in corpore nigro), will 
take on a [lighter] shade similar to the colour of origanum. 

We may note here the interesting observation on colour contrast which 
occurs in the ‘Commentary’ ( Tafsir ) on Aristotle’s Meteorology , attributed to 
Olympiodorus (Badawi, ed., Shuruh 'ala Aristu , p. 155). It is remarked that 
colours may change their appearance when viewed side by side; this, it is 
asserted, is an error of vision; for example, the colour arjau/an ( halourgos , 
porphyrous) appears ‘shiny and earthy’ (nayyiran turabiyyan) on a white cloth, 
and ‘grey and glittering’ (aghbara barraqan) on a black cloth. Compare 
Olympiodori in Aristotelis Meteora Commentaria, pp. 244-45; see also [pseudo-] 
Aristotle, De coloribus , in Aristotle, Minor Works , Loeb ed., p. 21. 


chapter 7 

Though not irrelevant to the subject of Bk I, the discussion of the utilities of 
the instruments of sight ( [1-10, 14-18]) does not do much to advance the new 


6o 


Commentary 


6i 


theory, and many of the utilities detailed here can be traced to the writings of 
Galen (especially his De usu partium , Bk x) and of his Arabic successors. 
However, the description of the shapes of the surfaces of the eye’s layers, and 
of their disposition relative to one another ([11-13]) is specific to I. H., as 
noted earlier (see comment to Bk I, ch. 5). But a more complete account of the 
geometry of the eye and of the role of this geometry in the visual process has 
already been given in Chapters 5 and 6. 

[ 4 ] 1- See I, s[6-8] and associated notes; also comment (a) to Bk I, ch. 5. 

[4] 2. ‘ If it were thin . . . behind it’. Omitted from E. 

[4] 3 I H.’s treatise On the Fact that the Sphere is the largest of the solid Figures 
with equal Peripheries, and that the Circle is the largest of the plane Figures with equal 
Peripheries ( Maqala no. Ill 26; see above, Introduction, sec. 1 ) is known to have 
survived in three manuscript copies; see Sezgin, GAS , v, p. 366, no. 5 
(includes reference to a discussion by H. Dilgan and a Russian translation by 
G. al-Dabbagh). The treatise, which claims to offer the first proof of the 
proposition declared in its title, contains a reference to Archimedes’ On the 
Sphere and the Cylinder. 

[ 5 ] I- ‘ an extremely light membrane’, that is, lens capsule, called elsewhere 
al-tabaqa al-'ankabutiyya , or cobweb-like tunic (Galen’s arachnoeides chiton ). See 
comment (a) to Bk I, ch. 5. 

[ 5 ] 2 . On the effect of light on sight as an effect ‘of the nature of pain’, see 
note on I, 6(67]. See also I, 4(5], note 1. 

[9] 1. ‘foresight of nature’: istizhdr al-tabVa. The Arabic isti^hdr has the sense 
of preparation, precaution, hence prudence or foresight. Note the coupling of 
‘the Artificer’s mercy’ with foresight or skill of Nature in this paragraph and in 
paragraph [18] below. 

[ 15 ] i* See II, 2 [24-26]. 

[16] 1. ‘[strong] lights’. A l andE have al-adwa* al-mudVa (shining lights), R: 
lucem fortem. See I, 4(5], note 1. 


I. 8 [7] 

relevant to the theory expounded in Bk II, that for light to be sensed 
(recorded) by the ‘sentient organ’ (crystalline humour) it must occupy a 
certain minimal part of that organ. A minimal part is described as one whose 
magnitude has an ‘appreciable’ ratio to the whole, and it is said to vary with 
the ‘power of sense’ and therefore from eye to eye. What we have here is an 
alternative explanation of what Euclid’s Optics (Definition 3) had proposed to 
explain in terms of discrete rays: those objects are not seen which fall between 
the separated rays. According to I. H., an object is not seen when the area 
occupied by the object’s image in the crystalline humour is too small for the 
power of sense. 

The relations between density ( ghilaz/spissitudo ), opacity ( kathafa/densitas ) 
and colour, and the conditions for light to be fixed ( thabata/figere ) in opaque or 
dense bodies are clearly stated in [9-10]. The account in these paragraphs, 
brief though it is, makes up a little for the loss of Chapter 3 from the Latin 
translation (see comment (a) to Bk I, ch. 3). 

[6] i.‘ with the form of colour. And when it senses the mixed form’. 
Omitted from E (192:7, after mumtazija). 

[6] 2. ‘ or since’. Reading aw laysa, with A,. E has wa laysa. 

[71 1- ‘ the powers of the senses are limited’. The last word translates 
mutanahiya (R: finitae). 

[ 7 ] 2. See opening comment to Chapter 4. 


CHAPTER 8 

The words ‘reasons’ and ‘conditions’ in the title of this chapter translate al-'ilal 
and al-ma'ani , respectively. Risner’s title simply reads: De iis sine quibus visio 
non potest compleri. No title is supplied in (fol. 20 v ) and the text continues 
without a break in L 2 (fol. 1 i v A29). 

The chapter is, on the whole, a recapitulation of doctrines already explained 
in the previous chapters. [6] seems to end by favouring the hypothesis that 
colours send out their forms (images) only when they are illuminated (‘et non 
est ex colore forma nisi sit in ea lux’ — R23:7). [7] makes the statement. 


63 


BOOK II 

a. The psychological apparatus 

If we see the world not by sending out feelers that touch the surfaces of objects 
around us but by receiving imprints or ‘forms’ in our eyes, then how do we 
come to see objects out there ? I. H. formulates the question as an objection 
raised by the supporters of the visual-ray theory against the intromission 
hypothesis — an objection which, he believes, must be answered if the 
hypothesis is to be upheld (II, 3 [71] )- In his view the objection is based on a 
mistaken identification of visual perception with ‘pure sensation’. But, as he 
argues in the same paragraph, we do not in fact see an object merely as a result 
of receiving a representation in the form of an array of light and colour, but by 
reacting upon such a representation after it has been registered in the brain. 
What the upholders of the visual-ray theory have failed to realize is that there is 
no vision , properly speaking, without the exercise of judgement’ and ‘prior 
knowledge’. (In II, 3 [ 12 1 ] he makes the remarkable statement that a person old 
enough to have acquired the faculty of discrimination will ‘upon looking at a 
visible object . . . know it to be a body, and on the basis of immediate vision 
will judge it to be a body, even without perceiving its extension in the three 
dimensions’.) I. H. thus maintains that the objection raised by the adherents of 
the visual-ray hypothesis applies only to a deficient intromission theory, not 
to a properly developed one that takes into account the psychological process 
necessarily involved in every normal act of seeing. It is accordingly the 
purpose of Book II to provide a full explanation of the psychology of visual 
perception — undoubtedly the most important single component of the 
theory of direct vision already launched in Book I. 

We should note that it makes no difference to this psychological theory 
whether the ‘form’ eventually presented to the brain is the non-visible entity 
(Kepler’s ens rationale) first realized in the crystalline humour, or a visibly 
distinct image depicted on the retina (Kepler’s pictura — see below, comment 
( b ), under $ura/forma). In either case the assumption is made that the sensation 
recorded in the brain is a pattern of illumination and colour corresponding to 
their arrangement on the surface of the object. 

The general outline of the psychological account is as simple as it is 
distinctive. An image (or form) of the object seen is carried intact from the eye 
in which it has been received to the ‘common nerve’ where it is perceived by a 
faculty called ‘the last sentient’ (al-hass al-akhir/ultimum sentiens) which resides 
in the front of the brain (I, 6[68j; II, ^[4] ). Presumably this is where all kinds of 
sensation (visual, auditory, tactile, etc.) are registered after they have been 


II. (a) 

delivered by the various sense organs; but I. H. does not use the designation 
‘common sense’ and we shall be well advised to follow his example. The 
faculty is called ‘last sentient’, apparently, because the visual power has 
extended, by means of the visual spirit, all the way down from this part of the 
brain to the crystalline humour where the first visual sensation occurs (see 
opening comment to Bk I, ch. 6 and note on II, 2[i 1]). Upon reaching the end 
of its journey the image becomes subject to an operation performed by a 
faculty which I. H. does not take care to localize in the brain but which 
obviously has access to the contents of the ‘last sentient’. The operation is 
somewhat complex, involving, among other things, memory of past experi- 
ence. I. H.’s name for this faculty is al-quunva al-mumayyiza , or simply 
al-tamyiz (virtus distinctiva, virtus distinguendi , distinctio). I have translated I. H.’s 
term by ‘the faculty of judgement’, or ‘of discernment’. The term might raise 
questions as to I. H.’s sources and it will be well to say something about it 
here. 

In ordinary usage the cognate verb mayyaza means to set apart, to separate, 
distinguish, discern or discriminate; and tamyiz is the performing of these 
actions. The use of tamyiz to denote an act ofjudgement is widely attested in 
common usage; and in the legal literature sinn al-tamyiz (the age of discrimin- 
ation, discretion or judgement) refers to the age at which one reaches the 
ability to distinguish between what is beneficial to oneself from what is not. 
According to al-Ghazali this stage (tawr) of tamyiz occupies in the scale of 
cognition a place higher than sense-perception but lower than rational reason 
(' aql ) and is attained at the age of seven. As examples of 'aql he cites the 
grasping of the necessary, the possible and the impossible, but gives no 
examples of tamyiz , saying only that by means of it the seven-year-old 
apprehends matters ‘nothing of which is found in the realm of sense- 
perception’ (1 al-Munqidh , p. 133). In an earlier account to be found in the 
Epistles of the Sincere Brethren, tamyiz , here closely associated with the 
‘cogitative faculty’ ( al-fikr , al-quwwa al-mufakkira) , is considered to be a 
function of the ‘rational soul’ ( al-nafs al-natiqa) — see Rasa’il, 11, pp. 378, 390, 
410; also pp. 412, 433-42, 439-40. 

Tamyiz and its cognates figure early in Arabic philosophical literature, 
already making an appearance in translations of Greek works, though with 
little evidence of concern for consistency in rendering Greek terms. The 
translator of Aristotle’s De anima sometimes employs e aql mumayyiz (discrim- 
inating mind) for nous (430 b 4) and for nous kritikos (434 b 3) but generally 
renders krinein not by mayyaza but by qada (to judge) — see, e.g ., 4i8 a I4f., 
428 a 3, and especially 422 a 2i, where Aristotle makes the remark that sight 
discerns ( krinei ) darkness though it cannot see it (see Badawf s edition of the 
version attributed, Pwrongly, to Ishaq ibn Hunayn, which uses the Bekker 


Commentary 


64 

numbers; also S. M. Afnan, Philosophical Lexicon in Persian and Arabic , 
pp. 284-85). Again, the innate faculty of discrimination (dynamis kritike), of 
which Aristotle says in Posterior Analytics 99 b 35 that it is possessed by all 
animals, is called in the Arabic version of Matta ibn Yunus from Ishaq’s Syriac 
translation quwwa mukhtabira , examining faculty, not quwwa mumayyiza , 
discerning or judging faculty. 

In the Arabic version (by Ishaq) of Themistius’ De anima (ed. Lyons), tamyiz 
corresponds to dianoia , a faculty said to be found only in man and designated 
by other names, such as r aql (nous), quwwa natiqa (dynamis logike) and tasawwur 
bi-al- c aql (noesis) — see especially p. 153, line 17 and p. 154, lines 9-15. 

A quick look at some of the Islamic philosophers preceding and contem- 
porary with I. H. will help in defining his position. In the extant writings of 
al-Kindi, tamyiz , apparently denoting a faculty of the rational soul, is some- 
times used in conjunction with fikr (thought) and 'aql (intelligence) — see 
Rasail , ed. Abu Rida 1, pp. 274-75, 296. (On the relation between fikr and 
dianoia , discursive thought, see Walzer, Greek into Arabic , p. 96; Jolivet, 
L } intellect selon Kindi , p. 26, n. 2.) Al-Farab! knew the word (see e.g . Falsafat 
Aristutalis, ed. Mahdl, p. 13 1, line 3), but does not appear in his surviving 
works to have had a special use for it. However, the fadila fkriyya about which 
he discourses at length in his Tahsil al-sa'ada (‘The Attainment of Happiness’) 
(Rasa’il, no. 2) denotes the ability of rulers and statesmen to discern (mayyaza) 
the proper means of guiding the community towards perfection. Both 
al-Kindi and al-Farabl must have been aware of the discriminative and judging 
capacity (dynamis kritike) attributed by Aristotle (and Alexander of Aphro- 
disias) to the faculty of sense (with regard to al-Farabl see the remark by 
Walzer in Ara\ pp. 389—90). Avicenna, also following the Aristotelian tradi- 
tion, explicitly states in his De anima (iv, 1) that the sense-faculty, as well as 
apprehending sensible forms, is capable of discriminating (mayyaza) between 
them. The sensus communis , where sense-data are gathered from the various 
sense-organs, discriminates between, say, an object of sight and an object of 
touch or taste. And it is further able to judge (hakama) that, e.g., this red thing 
is acid-tasting. Avicenna does not, however, apply the name tamyiz (he does 
not use the expression al-quwwa al-mumayyiza) to any of the five internal 
faculties of cognition in the animal soul which, as is well known, he describes 
in Book IV of the De anima: (1) sensus communis , (2) virtus formalist for mativ a I 
imaginatio, (3) imaginativa/ cogitativa, (4) aestimatio/aestimativa, and (5) virtus 
memorialist recordatio. (The Arabic terms are: (1) al-hiss al-mushtarak , (2) al - 
musawwirat al-khayal, (3) al-mutakhayyila/ al-mufakkira, (4) al-wahm, and (5) al- 
dhikr i al-tadhakkur .) O { aestimatio Avicenna says that ‘it would seem that the 
estimative faculty is the same as the cogitative-and-imaginative and the 
memorative, and [also] the same as the judging [faculty /, so that it is by itself 


II. (a) 65 

judging, and by its movements and actions imaginative and memorative 
(ed. Rahman, pp. 168-69; ed. Van Riet, iv-v, p. n, lines 44-47; emphasis 
added). Here, for ‘judging’ Avicenna uses hakima ( diiudicans ), from hakama, to 
judge, and not mumayyiza. When tamyiz is used by him in the De anima, the 
term indicates a rational activity the nature of which he does not clearly 
specify; nor does he explicitly identify tamyiz with al-mufakkira (cogitativa) 
which, as he says, is the name applied to the imaginativa when employed by the 
rational animal (ed. Rahman, p. 166, lines 3-4; ed. Van Riet, p. 6, lines 75-78). 
In the Latin version of De anima , tamyiz in this rather vague sense is rendered 
by such general terms as cognitio, cognoscere, ratio (see Van Riet’s edition, 
Glossaries). 

So far as I can tell, Averroes is the first Islamic philosopher in whose 
writings we encounter the quwwa mumayyiza (thus called) as a distinct faculty 
of cognition to which a definite role is assigned. In a chapter devoted to 
memory and recollection in his Epitome of Aristotle’s Parva naturalia ( Talkhis 
Kitdb al-Hiss wa al-mahsus, Bk 11, ch. 1), he describes recollection as a process 
involving the co-operation of three distinct faculties: a faculty of imagination 
(quwwat al-takhayyul, al-musawwir) brings forward (ahdara) the image ( khayal , 
sura) originally obtained by it when a sense-object first presented itself to the 
sense-organ and to the common sense (al-hiss al-mushtarak); another faculty, 
called ‘retentive’ (al-hafiz) must also recall the ma'na (notion) which is 
associated with the sense-object and its image, and which this faculty has 
preserved since the first perceptual encounter with the object; and, finally, a 
third faculty, called al-tamyiz or al-mumayyiz or al-quwwa al-mumayyiza, 
combines the image with the associated ma 'na in an act of judgement which 
recognizes that this ma'na belongs to this image and, hence, to the now absent 
object which originally produced the image. This third faculty is called 
mumayyiza (distinguishing) because it is the same faculty that has discerned or 
separated the ma'na from the image in the first place. 

Averroes says that in man the judgement attributing a certain ma'na to a 
certain image is a function of reason ('aql); and although he remarks that the 
faculty responsible for such a judgement in animals ‘has no name’ he adds that 
Avicenna calls it ‘ al-wahmiyya ’ (aestimativa) (Arabic text, ed. Blumberg, 
p. 39). This is a reference to the well-known example, in Avicenna’s De anima, 
of the lamb which, upon seeing the wolf for the first time, judges it to be 
dangerous, thus associating the non-sensible notion (ma'na) of enmity with 
the wolf’s sensible image. Another word for the mumayyiz in man is the 
mufakkir (cogitativa) and, as with Avicenna’s wahmiyya, Averroes locates the 
mumayyiz in the middle of the brain, between the musawwir (image-forming 
faculty) to the front, and the retentive to the back. We do not, therefore, seem 
to have moved far from Avicenna, despite the difference in vocabulary; and 


66 


Commentary 


67 


Averroes’ mumayyiz is very much the same as Avicenna’s faculty of judge- 
ment which, as we have seen, the latter wishes to identify with the wahm. 
Averroes of course wrote more than a hundred years after I. H., but his 
concepts and language may reflect a usage that had been in the course of 
development very much earlier. In fact the evidence suggests that this must 
have been the case. 

The Stoic concept of a ‘ruling faculty’ ( hegemonikon ) makes a brief but 
significant appearance in Ptolemy’s Planetary Hypotheses and, especially, in his 
Optica. In the former work (probably the last of Ptolemy’s compositions) the 
faculty is referred to in the Arabic version by the expression al-quwwa al-ra’isa 
(in the plural) and is there considered the source of voluntary motion ( haraka 
iradiyya) in living beings here on earth and in the heavens (ed. Goldstein, p. 36, 
line 22) . Similarly, the Optica speaks of the uirtus regitiua as a coordinator of eye 
movements (111,61 and Lejeune’s n. 22 on p. 22), but it is the cognitive 
function of this faculty that is mostly in question in this book (11, 22, 23, 76). 
The remarks in 11, 22 and 23 are particularly interesting. The proper and 
primary objects of sight, we are told, are light and colour, and these are 
discerned ( diuideri ) by the uis regitiua when their effect (passio ) in the eye 
reaches a certain degree of intensity. The other visible properties (res uidende , 
see below, comment (b), under ma c na/intentio) are distinguished in a secondary 
manner ( sequenti modo) from accidents or attributes ( accidentes ) of the primary 
effect through an act of Pcomparison and Pinference (per relationem et ratioci- 
nationem). From this we may gather that, according to Ptolemy, the regitiua is 
involved in all acts of vision. Later, in 11, 98, Ptolemy observes that visual 
error in regard to motion may arise, not in the eye itself, but in what he calls in 
this single place ‘ uirtus discernitiua (obviously a translation of al-quwwa 
al-mumayyiza), as when we take (putare) a fast-moving disc or a moving object 
at a great distance from us to be at rest. These and similarly brief remarks in 
Ptolemy’s Optica probably bring us closer to I. H.’s Optics than any of the 
statements we have found in the Islamic philosophers. But the cryptic and 
undeveloped nature of these remarks also indicate the wide gap between the 
two books. See Lejeune, Euclide et Ptolemee, pp. 98-99, on Ptolemy’s view of 
the role of estimation (existimare = thadasa, tzanna) in the perception of size. 

To the Ptolemaic distinction between properties which are seen primo and 
those which are seen sequenter ( Ptol.Opt ., 13:1, 8), there corresponds a 
fundamental and elaborate distinction in I. H.’s Optics between what he calls 
‘pure sensation’ and what may be called judgemental perception’. The visible 
properties (al-ma'ani al-mub$ara/intentiones uisibiles ), we are told in II, 3 [ 1 ], are 
properties of physical objects and are perceived only in physical objects. Not 
all visible properties are perceived in the same manner, however. Two of 
them, light and colour, are said to be perceived by ‘pure sensation’ (bi-mujarrad 


II. (b) 

al-hiss /solo sensu). For I. H., ‘pure sensation’ is the illumination and coloration 
produced in the eye by the incoming ‘forms’ of the light and colour in the 
object (3 [9]); or, to be more precise, it is the sense-faculty’s awareness of this 
illumination and coloration (3 [17]) — an awareness which he also calls 
‘perception of light as such’ and of ‘colour as such’ (3 [25]). All other visible 
properties (size, distance, magnitude, shape, motion, and the rest) are judge- 
mental in the sense that their perception always involves a variety of mental 
acts (attending, scrutinizing, comparing, recognizing, syllogizing, conjectur- 
ing) which are performed or directed by a faculty of judgement which exists in 
man from childhood, at least as an activity involved in sense-perception 
(3 [42]). But although it is the sense of sight that ‘senses’ the form of an object 
from the form or image produced in the eye by the object’s light and colour, 
and although perception of these two properties ‘as such’ is said to be by pure 
sensation, I. H. is emphatic about the pervasive role of the faculty of judge- 
ment. As he argues at length (3 [49-66]), the assertion ‘this is red’, which 
might be taken as a mere recording of a sense impression, implies a compari- 
son of the currently experienced red with previous impressions of red which 
have been stored in the imagination. Thus, to be aware of what a certain colour is 
is an act of recognition (ma'rifa/cognitio) which depends on the faculties of 
imagination and memory, and not only on the sensation (ihsas/sensus) initiated 
in the crystalline humour and transmitted through the optic nerve to the brain. 
‘Sight’, or rather the faculty of judgement through sight, may then recognize 
other properties in the form which, or the like of which, it has previously 
perceived; and this, too, he calls perception by recognition. And, finally, the 
faculty of judgement discerns, by a process of inference, all other properties in 
the received form that cannot be perceived by sensation or recognition 
(3[ 2 5])* Bk II, ch. 3 accordingly falls into two main parts: [1-42] expound the 
argument that not all properties are perceived by pure sensation; and the rest 
of the chapter ([43-235]) is given to showing in detail the modes of inference 
employed by the faculty of judgement in perceiving each of the visible 
properties. 

b. Some basic concepts and their expressions: ihsas/sensus, al-hass! sentiens , idrak/ 
comprehensio 

In the Latin translation of the Optics , sensus renders four Arabic words: hdssa , 
hiss , ihsas and al-hass. Hassa is always a faculty of sense, in particular the sense 
of sight (hassat al-ba$ar / sensus visus). Al-hiss usually refers generally to ‘the 
sense’ or ‘the sense-faculty’ and is thus rendered in the English translation; 
but, sometimes, as in the expression bi-mujarrad al-hiss , it may also denote the 
operation of that faculty, namely ‘sensation’. Ihsas designates either the 
activity of the sense of sight, or the state of consciousness consequent upon 


L~ 


12 


68 


Commentary 


69 


that activity or the impression obtained by that sense, and is almost always 
expressed in the English translation by ‘sensation’, and only a tew times by 
‘perception’. I have translated the verb ahassa (Latin: sentire , percipere , cog- 
noscere) by ‘to sense’, ‘to have a sensation of’ and, in one or two places, ‘to 
become aware of’ (the last expression being also one of the usual meanings of 
‘to sense’ in English). 

Al-hass literally means one who senses (or that which senses) or is capable of 
sensing, and, like Aristotle’s to aisthetikon, may refer to the animal/person, or 
to a psychic faculty or to an organ of that faculty (cj. Hamlyn, Aristotle’s De 
Atiima , pp. xvii— xviii; id.. Sensation and Perception , pp. 1-5)- Nor is it easy to 
determine in each case which one of these is intended. (The Latin has resort to 
three expressions: sensus , sentiens and membrum sentiens.) Since ‘sentient’ could 
be used substantively to mean ‘one who or something which has sensation’ 
(OED), I have usually chosen this word to preserve the ambiguity and thus to 
avoid suggesting what in some cases might be a wrong or unintended 
interpretation. 

I. H. uses the verb adraka and the verbal noun idrdk , as they are used in 
normal Arabic, to cover a fairly wide range of meanings, applying them both 
to sense-perception as well as all kinds of mental apprehension. Sometimes 
idrdk and ihsds take turns in the same passage as synonyms (2(27]), and 
sometimes idrdk is the apprehension of a conclusion in a syllogism and thus has 
the sense of fahm (understanding) (3 [3 2]) (on the lack of distinction between 
sensation and perception in the classical Greek philosophers, see Hamlyn, 
Sensation and Perception , ch. 1). I have consistently rendered adraka by ‘per- 
ceive’, having in mind the general sense: ‘to take in with the mind or senses’ 
(OED). The most regular equivalents in Latin are comprehendere and 
comprehensio. 

sura/forma 

The Arabic word rendered in the Latin translation by forma and in the 
English translation by ‘form’ is sura , which in ordinary usage means, among 
other things: form, shape, figure, outward appearance, effigy, image, picture, 
semblance, illustration. The early translators of Greek works used sura for a 
number of Greek words, including: eidos , idea, eidolon , morphe , eikon , typos . 
I. H. has a special name for specular images, namely khayalat (though he may 
refer to the khaydl as a $ura seen inside a mirror — e.g. in I, 1 [7] ), but he 
nowhere in the Optics defines the more basic and more commonly used sura . 
As we have seen (above, note on I, 1 [4], and comment (a) to Bk I, ch. 3: 
‘Ontology and vocabulary of light and colour’), the later Discourse on Light 
expounds the doctrine that light and, by extension, colour, exist as essential or 
accidental ‘forms’ of shining and coloured objects — essential when they 


II. (b) 

naturally inhere in the object, and accidental when they belong to the object 
only as long as they are projected upon it from outside. Here form is an 
essential or accidental property in virtue of which an object is essentially or 
accidentally luminous or coloured. Though not explicitly formulated in the 
Optics , this doctrine may be said to furnish the underlying physical basis to the 
theory of visual perception presented in that book. It supplies in fact the only 
answer in I. H.’s works to the question as to what manner of existence light 
and colour have in physical bodies. But the psychological theory of vision is 
not itself concerned with forms as defined in the physical doctrine. Basic to 
this empirical theory are two senses of the word ‘form’ which should be 
clearly differentiated: one is form as the total visible appearance of an object ; and the 
other is form as the image or likeness of the object as a pattern of light and colour , 
which is conveyed to the beholder through the intervening medium. (Not 
surprisingly in a psychological theory based on observation and introspec- 
tion, these happen to be two of the more ordinary meanings of sura or ‘form’.) 
Thus, when we read in the Optics that we behold the ‘form of an object’ when 
the ‘form’ given off by the object enters our eyes, we often should understand 
‘form’ in these two occurrences as having these two senses, respectively. Now 
form as total appearance consists not only of illumination and colour, but of all 
the visible properties ( al-ma c ani al-mubsara/intentiones visibiles) of the object, 
such as size, shape, texture, location, and so on. On the other hand, form as an 
image (our Mi — see opening comment to Bk I, ch. 6) in the medium or on the 
surface of the eye is nothing but the physical effect of illumination and colour, 
these two being the only visible properties capable of extending themselves 
into space. According to the principle of punctiform analysis (above, com- 
ment (b) to Bk I, ch. 3), this extension or radiation originates from individual 
points or point-forms on the surface of the object. Or, as I. H. would put it, 
from the light and colour (or from the forms/properties of light and colour) at 
every point on the surface of the object, ‘forms’ [i.e. images] of that light and 
colour proceed rectilinearly in all directions. 

Earlier we have been led to distinguish various meanings of ‘form’ in I. H. ’s 
exposition (see opening comment to Bk I, ch. 6). One of these, namely form 
as a distinct total image Mi of the optical array M p displayed by the visible 
object, is the basis of perception of the object as a totality of visible properties. 
Let us now call form as such a totality: F a {i.e. form as the total appearance of 
the object — see II, 4[i]). We may then say that, according to I. H., form-as- 
appearance (F a ) must be deduced from form-as-image (Mi) by a mental 
examination of features (one is almost compelled to say ‘clues’) in Mi and of 
experiences and circumstances accompanying the reception of Mi — an 
examination which involves the various operations of contemplation ( intui - 
tio) y comparison and inference (II, 3[i49-i5i, 154]). A ‘true perception’ of F a 


70 


Commentary 


7i 


will be achieved when all visible properties constituting F a have been correctly 
inferred. 

As noted earlier, it is a consequence of our formulation that images f/s of all 
points on the surface of the visible object will be found everywhere on the 
surface of the eye, from which surface these images will proceed to the 
crystalline humour in accordance with the rules of refraction. It follows that a 
multitude of forms/images Mi’s will be produced on the surface of the 
crystalline. This conclusion obliges I. H. to postulate a selective sensitivity in 
the crystalline humour the function of which is to disengage a single, distinct 
image (let us call it ‘M s ’) from the multitude of other, equally real images Mi’s 
(see opening note to Bk II, ch. 2 and note on II, 2[n]). All of this reminds us of 
the distinction Kepler draws between image as ‘ ens rationale ’ (which he 
believed to have been the concept generally adopted until his time), and image 
as ‘ pictura' , the concept at the basis of his own theory of vision (Ad Vitellionem 
paralipomena , Frankfurt, 1604, p. 193: ‘Definitio. Cum hactenus Imago fuerit 
Ens rationale, iam figurae rerum vere in papyro existentes, seu alio pariete, 
picturae dicantur’; quoted by Ronchi, Histoire , p. 80; see Chevalley’s trans- 
lation, p. 352). It may be said that I. H.’s M s , real though it is, is a ‘thing of the 
mind’ in the sense that it is apparent only to the sense-faculty. And it shares 
this external invisibility with the image Leonardo meant when he wrote in 
1492: ‘All bodies together, and each by itself, give off to the surrounding air an 
infinite number of images [similitudini] which are all in all and all in each part, 
each conveying the nature, colour, and form [fgura] of the body which 
produces it.’ And again: ‘Every body in light and shade fills the surrounding 
air with infinite images of itself; and these, by infinite pyramids diffused in the 
air, present this body through space and in every part.’ ( Literary Works , 
ed. Richter, 1, p. 136). Leonardo’s similitudo is an ens rationale inasmuch as a 
picture will not , for example, be seen on a sheet of paper held opposite the 
facade of a building. Leonardo knew, however, how to obtain a pictura from 
the confused images on the sheet through the simple device of piercing a hole 
in the paper and receiving the distinct image on a darkened plane. But 
although I. H. was acquainted with the principles of such a device, he never 
employed it in his theory of vision (see above, Introduction, sec. II, discussion 
of I. H.’s On the Form of the Eclipse ; also I, 6[85-88]). (On the relation between 
M, and M s , see below, opening comment to Bk. II, ch. 2 and, generally, on 
I. H. ’s concept of form, see Sabra, ‘ “Form” in I. H. ’s Theory of Vision’). 

ma' na /intentio 

The classical Arabic lexicographers associate ma'na with two basic notions 
which are relevant to our discussion: meaning or intention (qasd) and self- 
manifestation. One of the earliest of these lexicographers, al-Khalll ibn 


II. (b) 

Ahmad, obscurely refers to the ma'na ‘of any thing’ as ‘the test ( mihna ) of the 
thing, and the state ( hal ) into which the thing passes’ (Ibn Faris, Mu jam, iv, 
p. 148). Another, Ibn al-A'rabl, connects intention and self-manifestation in a 
definition of ma'na as ‘the intention which comes out and manifests itself 
(yabruz wa yazhar) in the thing when it is searched for’; the ma'na ! meaning of a 
piece of discourse, for example, is what comes out ( yabruz ) from the hidden 
recesses of words (ibid., pp. 148—49). Note, however, that while Ibn al- 
A'rabi’s example has to do with language, his definition is more general. 
Using the cognate verb, he observes that one says of a piece of land ‘ lam ta c ni 
hadhihi al-ardu shay 'an , meaning that the land has not shown or brought forth 
any vegetation. In the eighth and ninth centuries, the word had already been 
taken over into the burgeoning Arabic and religious disciplines, such as 
grammar, rhetoric and jurisprudence, where it acquired a number of special- 
ized senses. It is a notoriously difficult, perhaps muddled, term in kalam (see 
the articles by R. Frank listed in Bibl.). The ninth-century translators of Greek 
philosophical writings used ma 'na to render Greek words with rather wide 
applications, like noema , logos and pragma. In a well-known passage at the 
beginning of Aristotle’s De interpretation, the translator, Ishaq ibn Hunayn, 
uses the plural ma'am for Aristotle’s ta pragmata , the actual things whose 
affections (athar/pathemata) in the soul are symbolized by spoken sounds and 
written marks (Badawl, ed., Mantiq Aristu , p. 59, line 8; see Ackrill, Aristotle's 
Categories and De interpretatione, pp.43, 1 13-14). Highly influential though 
this passage was, the Islamic philosophers generally employed ma 'na to denote 
the images, notions and concepts which correspond in the mind to the actual 
things and to their spoken or written symbols. It has also been suggested that, 
in the kalam literature, ma'na sometimes corresponds to the Stoic lekton (van 
den Bergh, trans., Averroes’ Tahajut al-Tahajut, 11, pp. 4, 60). In Avicenna’s 
scheme for faculty psychology, ma'na came to be associated with a special 
concept rendered in the Latin translation of his De anima by the widely 
discussed and not infrequently misunderstood intentio (see below). And in 
I. H. ’s Optics , the same word acquired still another special sense, quite distinct 
from that in Avicenna, though misleadingly also translated as intentio. 

Along with these developments everyone continued to use ma 'na as a 
common, multi-purpose word covering a host of meanings, such as matter, 
affair, state of affairs; thing, fact; matter in hand, question under discussion, 
situation; and, in the plural, circumstances, conditions, affairs — all of these in 
addition, of course, to notion, concept, idea, thought, proposition. In this 
rather wide application of the term, ma'na seems to overlap to a large extent 
with the Greek pragma (see LSJ, Greek-English Lexicon , under senses 11. 1, 2, 8 
and hi. 1), while also corresponding partially to the Greek noema. The Optics 
of I. H. was no exception, and in it we find the term employed in a variety of 


72 


Commentary 


73 


senses which often underlie the frequent occurrence, in the Latin translation, 
otres or the simple use of neuter demonstrative pronouns (hoc, illud , istud) for 
hadha al-ma'na , this thing, or matter, or notion, etc. (see the Arabic-Latin 
Glossaries). 

In the Optics we also encounter a special, technical sense of ma'na in 
expressions like al-ma'ani al-mub$ara, al-ma'ani al-juz’iyya, al-ma'ani al-latifa, 
which in the Latin version are translated as intentiones visibiles , intentiones 
particulares and intentiones subtiles , respectively. The Optics has the merit of 
distinguishing clearly between the visible object, al-mubsar , and the visible 
property, al-ma'na al-mubsar; and the distinction is preserved in the Latin 
version by using res visa for the former and intentio visibilis for the latter. (The 
situation is different in Ptolemy’s Optica where, as Lejeune has pointed out 
[Ptol. Opt., p. n, n. 2], the expression res uidenda may refer to the object [to 
hordmenon] or to the property [to horaton ], with consequent difficulty in 
interpreting the text.) A visible property is said to exist in the visible object 
and to be perceived as belonging to the object. Indeed, the visible object, or 
the ‘form’ of the visible object (in the sense of our F a as defined in the previous 
comment), is nothing but the totality of the object’s visible properties. But 
since the visible properties are somehow indicated to the perceiver through 
the form/image of the object, they are also sometimes talked about as if they 
existed in the form/image. Strictly speaking, however, the form/image M* of 
an object is made up solely of point-images of light and colour, though it is 
with the help of this restricted optical image that the remaining objective 
properties are to be inferred. There is thus nothing mysterious about I. H.’s 
ma 'dm : to paraphrase the old lexicographers, they simply constitute the sum of 
qualities, relations and features by virtue of which an object shows itself forth 
to the beholder. Or, in language closer to that of I. H. , they are the constituent 
elements of an object’s form-as-appearance. We even have a complete list of 
the ma'ani from which all objects of vision, as distinguished from visible 
objects, may be compounded (3 [44]). 

The use of intentio for ma'na in the Latin translations of both Avicenna and 
I. H. should not mislead us into confusing the doctrines of these two authors. 
Avicenna describes ma'na as that which is perceived of a sensible object 
without itself being part of the sensible form ($ura) received at the time of 
perception ( De anima , ed. Rahman, pp. 164, 166-67; see Rahman, Avicenna's 
Psychology , pp. 79-83). He cites two paradigm cases exemplified by the lamb’s 
recognition of the wolf’s enmity immediately upon seeing the wolf for the 
first time, and the dog’s fleeing the stick with which it was previously beaten. 
In the first case, the recognition is instinctive (Avicenna uses ilham , direct 
apprehension or inspiration) and is not based on experience. In the second, the 
dog’s apprehension that pain is imminent presupposes a previous experience 


II. 1, 2 

in which stick and pain were associated with one another, tn both cases, the 
qualities ‘dangerous’ and ‘pain-causing’ are ma'anl, according to Avicenna, 
because neither is an element of the sensible form currently received from the 
wolf or from the stick, even though pain is itself a possible object of 
sense-perception which was originally experienced as a sense-datum con- 
nected with the sensible shape of the stick. 

While I. H. would treat Avicenna’s second case under what he calls 
‘perception by recognition’, it is clear that neither light, colour, shape nor size, 
to list only four of I. H. ’s ma'ani, is a ma'na in Avicenna’s sense as exemplified 
by the first case. Sharing the term ma'na does not in this instance indicate a 
common concern. 

chapter 1 

This is a prefatory chapter briefly explaining the aim of Bk II. 

[3] 1 4 intent . . . deliberate effort . . . determination’: qasd, ta'ammul, 
ta'ammud. 

CHAPTER 2 

When I. H. speaks, in [3], of the ‘whole form of the object’ as being correctly 
ordered on the surface of the crystalline humour by means of the radial lines, 
he must be referring, as we have noted earlier, to a total representative image 
(Mi) which consists of point-images fj’s each corresponding to a single 
point-form f p on the object’s surface (see opening comment to Bk I, ch. 6). It 
is only this representative image Mj which, he tells us, the crystalline is capable 
of sensing. Again, when he says, in [4], that ‘the forms’ extend from the 
crystalline’s surface through the crystalline’s body ‘along the radial lines 
alone’, he is once more thinking only of those point-images that make up the 
representative total image M*; that is to say he is referring only to those 
point-images which the crystalline humour is capable of ‘receiving’ as a 
sentient body (see note on [1 1]). I. H.’s proposed principle of selective sensitiv- 
ity thus allows us to introduce the concepts of what we might call ‘sensory 
point-images’ and ‘sensory total images’, which in turn may be defined by 
reference to what we might also call ‘sensory lines’, namely those privileged 
lines which, according to him, carry the sensation from the crystalline’s 
forward surface to the common nerve. Thus, within the crystalline humour, 
the sensory lines are simply segments of the radial lines themselves, i.e. those 
segments confined between the forward surface of the crystalline and the 
crystalline-vitreous interface. Designating a sensory point-image as ‘f s \ we 


74 


Commentary 


75 


can say that an f s within the crystalline humour is any point-image £ that, 
originating from a point-form f p on the object’s surface, has passed through 
the crystalline’s forward surface along one of the radial lines. A sensed total 
image M s of the whole visible surface will thus consist of all sensory 
point-images f s ’s that can be found on any plane cutting across the radial axis. 
Such a total image M s will be a ‘distinct’ image of the whole surface considered 
as a pattern (M p ) of light and colour. 

It is then assumed that, within the vitreous humour, the sensory lines 
coincide with those lines into which the radial lines are refracted, in accordance 
with the rules of optical refraction , at the crystalline-vitreous interface. To avoid 
reversal of the total image travelling along the refracted lines, this refraction is 
further supposed to be such that the sensory point-images f s ’s must turn away 
from the centre of the eye, which compels I. H. to make further assumptions 
about the shape of the crystalline-vitreous interface, and which also implies 
that the vitreous body must be denser than the crystalline body, so that the 
refraction would take place towards the normal to the separating surface 
([9-10]; above, comment (a) to Bk I, ch. 5). 

No refraction is supposed to take place as the sensation is transmitted to the 
optic nerve. From this point on, the sensation simply follows the extension of 
the sentient body (visual spirit) along the curved length of the nerve’s fibres 
([14-15]). Like parallel railings, the fibres keep the travelling sensory point- 
images from getting confused, thus preserving the integrity of the total 
sensory images until they reach the common nerve where the images from 
one eye coincide with those from the other (see III, 2[i-i6]). 

[41 1. See Bk I, ch. 6, especially [63-68]. 

[51 1 ‘in accordance with their order in the object’s surface’: c ala ma hiya 
f alayh fr sath al-mubsar , literally, ‘as they are in the object’s surface’. 

[11] The selective sensitivity of the crystalline humour. That the crystalline 
humour is the sensitive part of the eye is a doctrine which I. H. inherited from 
Galen, and which he believed to be indispensable whether or not one accepted 
the intromission hypothesis (I, 6[i4]). I. H. further remarks in I, 6[43 ] that ‘all 
mathematicians’ are agreed that visual perception must take place along the 
lines that constitute the visual cone. His own theory, combining as it does the 
intromission hypothesis and the geometry of the visual cone, compels him to 
seek an explanation for the privileged position of radial lines. He provides, in 
fact, several such explanations. 

In I, 6[42] he states that it is in the ‘nature’ of sight to ‘receive’ ( qabila ) the 
forms of light and colour along certain lines rather than others, and cites 
parallels to this situation from other natural phenomena (I, 6[43]). Another 
explanation is already given in I, 6[24] where it is argued that perpendicular 


II. 2 [11] 

action being stronger than action applied in an oblique direction, the crystal- 
line humour is apt to ‘perceive’ only those forms that impinge upon it along 
lines perpendicular to its outer surface. Here, in II, 2[i i], a third explanation is 
offered which, though not incompatible with the other two, should be 
distinguished from them. It is based on a proposed distinction between two 
modes of ‘reception’ (qabul) of light and colour within the crystalline, or rather 
between receptivity and sensitivity (cf Sabra, ‘Sensation and inference . . 
pp. 165-66). As a transparent body, the crystalline receives light in the same 
way as do other transparent bodies such as air or glass, that is, in accordance 
with the rules of refraction set out in Bk VII. This means that some of the 
light, namely that which strikes the crystalline’s surface at right angles, will 
enter the crystalline’s body without being bent, while the rest will be refracted 
along lines inclined to that surface. As a sensitive body, however, the 
crystalline is disposed to register only the light, or forms that proceed through 
it along unrefracted lines. Anticipating, as it were, this last explanation, 

I, 6[65] speaks of a ‘receptive and also sensitive power’ (al-quwwa al-qabila 
al-hassdsa aydan) in the crystalline. These words might give the impression that 
receptivity and sensitivity are one and the same capacity. In I, 6(90], however, 
sensitive reception (a property peculiar to the crystalline) is differentiated 
from a mode of reception which the crystalline shares with other transparent 
but inanimate bodies. 

II, 2[n] goes beyond these statements of Bk I to provide what can be 
described as a physiological basis for the two modes of reception. Now in 
Bk I the crystalline humour is referred to both as a ‘sentient body’ (I, 6(42]) 
and as a ‘sentient organ’ (I, 6[90, 92]) — al-jism al-hass /corpus sentiens , and 
al-'udw al-hass /membrum sentiens , respectively. Both designations occur in 

II, 2(11], a passage obviously concerned with the behaviour of forms within . 
the crystalline, as is made clear by the first and last sentences in this passage. 
It is first asserted that the ‘sentient organ’, being transparent, ‘receives’ the 
forms ‘in the manner proper to transmission’ ( qabula ta/diyatin/ad reddendum ), 
and, being endowed with a sensitive faculty (quwwa hassasa/ virtus sensibilis ), 
it ‘receives’ the forms ‘in the manner proper to sensation’ (qabula iftsasin/ 
secundum receptionem sensus). This is immediately followed by an argument in 
terms of ‘sentient body’: ‘And if the sentient body does not receive these 
forms in the same way as they are received by non-sensitive bodies, then the 
extension of forms through the sentient body does not take place along the 
lines required by transparent bodies: rather, the forms extend in accordance with 
the extension of the parts of the sentient body/ Of the three occurrences of 
‘sentient body’ in this sentence, the first, and probably also the second, refers 
to the crystalline humour. This is so because the argument is an immediate 
extension of what has just been said in the preceding sentence regarding the 



Commentary 


77 


76 

crystalline. Assuming that the third occurrence has the same referent, then we 
are being told here that the sensation is transmitted within the crystalline 
according to the physical arrangement of the crystalline’s sensitive parts, 
which arrangement physically assumes the radial form. If, however, ‘sentient 
body’ in its third occurrence refers to the visual spirit (often designated by this 
expression in the Optics — as it is already in I, 5[ 14] ), then I. H. would be 
implying that the spirit, as a vehicle of sensitive power, extends itself through 
the crystalline humour along the radial lines. (In connection with the problem 
discussed here, see II, 3 [46]. ) 

It should be remarked that Risner’s text, while consistently rendering the 
Arabic expressions for ‘sentient body’ and ‘sentient organ’, omits the impor- 
tant statement which I have italicized (R 26:15). The statement is also absent 
from L r (fol. 23 v , line 14) and from L 2 (fol. i3 r B, line 38). 

[14] I- See note on I, 6(67] . 

[18] 1. Notice the alternation of ‘density’ (ghila?) and ‘opacity’ ( kathafa ). 
Transparent bodies are said to possess a certain degree of opacity when their 
density exceeds that of air. See comment (a) to Bk I, ch. 3: ‘ Ontology and 
vocabulary of light and colour . 

[19-24] Let B, A, D lie in any plane through the visual axis AC (Figs C. II. I , 
C. II. 2a and C. II. 2b). 

Let BD represent the ‘common section’ (fasl mushtarak/dijferentia communis) 
of this plane and the spherical surface of the crystalline humour with C as 
centre. 



II. 2 [19-24] 

In Figure C. II. 1 let the straight line HE represent the common section of 
the same plane and the plane forward surface of the vitreous humour (see [9] 
and comment (a) to Bk I, ch. 5). 

And let axis AC be perpendicular to HE. 

It is clear that the symmetry of all radial lines in the plane of B, A, D with 
respect to AC, such as lines BH and DE, will be maintained while being 
refracted into the surface of the vitreous humour, thus preserving the formal 
integrity of the form/image occurring at BD. 



The same conclusion holds if the surface represented by HE is assumed to be 
part of a sphere the centre of which is a point on the axis not identical with C 
(Figs. C. II. 2a and C. II. 2b). 

No such symmetry would be preserved, and therefore the image would be 
altered, if the axis AC were to be assumed to be inclined to the surface of the 
vitreous humour, regardless of whether this surface is plane or spherical. 

I. H. therefore concludes in these paragraphs that it is a condition of veridical 
vision that the visual axis must be perpendicular to the crystalline-vitreous 
interface and, in consequence, that all planes through the axis must be 
perpendicular to that interface, be it plane or spherical. 

The figures provided in Risner’s edition for Bk II, sec. 7 (pp. 27 and 28) are the 
same as those that accompany the text of Vitellonis Optica for Bk in, sec. 24 
(pp. 96 and 97). The figures appear in the margins of L x (pp. 24 v and 25 r ) and in 
L 2 (p. I4 r ); and in Risner’s edition references to the figures have been inserted 
in the body of I. H.’s text. 


78 


Commentary 


79 



[19] 1. ‘all plane surfaces . . . drawn from the axis’: al-sutuh al-mustawiya 
allatx takhruju min al-sahm ( Omnes . . . superficies planae exeuntes ab axe). That is, 
all plane surfaces that contain the axis. The same expression occurs in [20-21]. 

[23] 1. ‘the form’. E and R, in agreement with A 2 , have ‘forms’ in the 
plural. The singular seems a justified emendation since the argument concerns 
the form of a single object. Note that elements of the total form are referred to 
in the text as points. 

[ 23 ] 2 - ‘Thus no part of the form’. A 2 and E: faAaysa shay’un min al-$uwar. 
R: Nulla ergo forma. See preceding note. 

[24] 1. ‘ in the form’. E, in agreement with A 2 and R, has ‘forms’ in the 
plural. See [23], notes 1 and 2. 

[25] 1. ‘in the form’. A 2 and E: fa-al-$uwar, thus in the plural. See [23], notes 
1 and 2; and [24], note 1. 

[26] 1. ‘Now it is this form’. A 2 , R and E have ‘forms’, in the plural. The 
singular, already preferred in the preceding three sections, is further con- 
firmed in this instance by the occurrence of ‘form’ in the latter part of the 
sentence and in the next sentence. 

chapter 3 

This chapter, on the modes of inference involved in perceiving each of the 
visible properties, constitutes the core of Bk II. Only light qua light and colour 
qua colour are perceived by pure sensation (bi-mujarrad al-hiss/solo sensu). 
Judgement (< al-tamyiz/distinctio ), comparison ( qiyds/comparatio ) and inference 


II. 3 

{istidlal! argumentatio y significatio) are operations involved in perceiving all other 
objects of visual perception. The operations are not sharply distinguished: 
tamyiz and qiyas are often conjoined; qiyas is used throughout in a variety of 
senses which include not only comparison but also several forms of inference; 
and istidlal is explained by reference to tamyiz and qiyas in [14], where we read 
that perception of transparency being possible only through istidlal , it follows 
that it can be achieved only by tamyiz and qiyas. But the essential point is clear: 
namely, that a mental operation performed by the faculty of judgement 
(quwwat al- tamyiz /virtus distinctiva) and involving at least one of a variety of 
inferences must lie at the basis of all acts of vision except the mere sensation of 
light and colour. Visible properties are accordingly divided into two main 
classes the first of which consists of only two members, light and colour, 
which are ‘perceived’ when we become aware of their forms or images (our 
fi’s — see opening comment to Bk I, ch. 6) upon their occurrence in the visual 
apparatus. The second class is made up of ‘inferential* or judgemental’ 
properties (as we may call them) the perception of which depends on mental 
acts applied to the received impressions of illumination and colour ([16-17]). 

As in Ptolemy (Ptol. Opt., II, 23, 24) and, apparently, Aristotle ( De anima , 
42i a i, a i6, 42 5 b 22) the immediate effect of external light and colour is a certain 
illumination and coloration of the visual organ; and it is awareness of these 
effects which I. H. calls ‘sensation’ ( ihsas/sensus — [9, 46]). By ‘perception by 
pure sensation’ he sometimes seems to mean perception of light or colour as 
belonging to a certain object — see e.g. Ill, $[$]. But to realize that two 
illuminations (or colours) are, for example, similar or dissimilar, requires a 
comparison ( qiyds/comparatio ) that goes beyond mere awareness of the 
illumination and colour themselves ( [2-10] ). It is also ‘by a kind of inference’ 
(bi-darb min duriib al-qiyas/per aliquem modorum ratiocinationis) that we come to 
recognize an individual ( shakhs/individuum ) or a species (nawVspecies) 

([18-21]). 

The expressions quoted above already illustrate the rather loose application 
of the key term qiyas. Qiyas can be simply a comparison of two objects or 
forms or properties; or an estimation or measurement of one thing by another; 
or a movement from the perception of a distinctive feature of an object to the 
identification of the object (or species) possessing that feature; or a movement 
in which the identification follows upon a close scrutiny (ta’ammul, tafaqqud/ 
intuitio) of all or most visible properties in the object; or, as in paragraphs 
[26-35], fyds can refer to a syllogistic form of argument consisting of two 
premisses and three terms. In this respect the Optics merely reflects a variety of 
ordinary as well as technical uses of the word that were current in I. H. ’s time. 
But the result can be confusing and the confusion is compounded in the Latin 
version. 


So 


Commentary 


The Latin translation distinguishes between qiyas in the sense of compari- 
son, which it renders by comparatio , and in the sense of inference, which it 
renders by several terms: argumentation ratio , ratiocination syllogismus. In the 
English translation I do not distinguish between qiyas in the sense of inference, 
and istidlaln using ‘inference' for both. The Latin, in addition to employing 
argumentatio and significatio for istidlal (see [81], note i; [161], note i; [163], 
note 1; [235], note 1), also translates the cognate verb istadalla by cognoscere 
([162], note 1). 

The Latin translation also tries to preserve what generally appears to be an 
intended distinction between qasa ila (to compare . . . with) and qasa bi - (to 
measure or estimate. . . by), rendering these two senses by two different 
verbs: comparare and mensurare (see [81], note 2; [147], note 1), but sometimes 
fails to maintain the distinction (see [135], notes 3 and 6; [148], note 1). But see 
also [87], note 2, for an instance where the Arabic qasa bi - seems to mean ‘to 
compare... with’. (Lexically the two Arabic expressions may be 
interchangeable.) 

I. H. refers to the giyJs/inference involved in recognizing an object (or a 
species) from features associated with the object (or species) as a guess or 
conjecture, thus emphasizing the lack of certainty (tayaqquti/certiftcatio) attend- 
ing this form of inference. He employs the verb hadasa and the verbal noun 
I iads, which the Latin translates by aestimare and aestimatio , respectively (see 
[89], note 1; [105], note 1; [in], note 1). But the Latin also misleadingly uses 
cognoscere and argumentatio for the same words (see [87], note 1; [88], notes 2 
and 3). 

The concepts of inference and ofinferential properties are closely connected 
with a concept of ‘sign’ ( amara/signum ) which I. H. cites in the course of his 
first account of recognition ( ma'rifa/cognitio ) for the purpose of distinguishing 
two kinds of inferen ce/qiyas ([22-25]; amdra is first mentioned in I, 6 [61]). A 
sign in this context is a distinctive mark or feature or property of an object 
(ma'na/intentio) which serves as an index or clue to the object’s identity ([22]; 
see also II, 4(20] ), and the inference involved in this case consists in comparing 
the presently perceived property with a previously acquired and currently 
memorized form/image of the individual object (recognition of an individual) 
or with a stored ‘universal form’ (recognition of a species) (cf. II, 4[ i 6 — 17] ). 
According to I. H. a more thorough form of inference, based on inspection of 
all or most features of the object, yields a perception distinct from either pure 
sensation or recognition ( [25] ). 

Other contexts, however, imply a different sense of ‘sign’ which it is 
important to notice. I. H. says, for example, in [52] that the inferential 
properties are discerned ‘in the sensed form’ and that ‘all perceptions by 
recognition can be achieved only by perceiving the signs in the form that is 


II. 3 [1] Si 

sensed’. And he also asserts in [45] that ‘all that is perceived by discernment, 
inference and recognition’ is apprehended as a result of discerning ‘the forms 
that occur in the cavity of the common nerve . . . ’. Forms in these and similar 
passages are what we propose to call ‘sensory images’ (M s ’s — see opening 
comment to Chapter 2), and we are told here that visible properties other than 
light and colour are ‘discerned’ from features or properties of the sensory 
images acting as ‘signs’ or clues. What are these features? The complete 
answer is scattered throughout I. H. ’s detailed treatment of the visible proper- 
ties, but they include the size, shape, illumination, colour and order of the 
image, all of which are clues to corresponding or related objective properties. 
Thus the size of a sensory image, being a function of the angle of vision, is a 
clue to the object’s size; the shape of the image is a factor in determining the 
object’s real shape; while illumination and colour as conveyed by an image 
may serve as clues to the object’s distance; and so on. On illumination and 
colour as clues to distance, see [159]; III, 7 [39], note an< i HI, 7(250], note 2 - 

Not all inferences are concerned with clues supplied by the optical images 
themselves. Other sensory experiences may be involved, and not all of these 
are related to the organ of vision. By closing and opening our eyelids we 
realize that the objects we see are located in external space and not inside our 
eyes ( [73-74] ), and we become aware of a visible object’s direction by turning 
our head or orienting our eyeballs ([95] and related notes). Experiences of a 
different order are at the basis of our estimation of distance which itself is a 
factor in estimating the size of a visible object — as I. H. explains in some of 
the most remarkable passages in Bk II ( [ 141 ff], esp. [150-158]). There he 
argues that the intermediate terrain (the continuous ground or a series ot 
connected bodies between the observer and the object seen) is estimated by 
relating the visual angles subtending the farther parts of the terrain to those 
subtending the closer parts, and by the unconscious practice from childhood 
of measuring the closer parts ‘by our body’. The distance from my eye of a 
point on the ground close to my feet, for example, is measured by my height, 
while other parts of the ground near that point are unintentionally measured 
every time I step on them or stretch my arm to them. These passages alone 
would be enough to earn I. H. an important place in the history of the 
psychology of visual perception. 

there occur’: 'arada/accidere. The reference is to properties that super- 
vene upon an object as a result of the action of some external cause. In this 
paragraph, res is the word preferred by the Latin translator to render ma'am 
(properties); see comment (b) to Bk II. 

[I] 2. Colours can also be said to ‘occur’ in or supervene upon a body when 
they are projected upon it from outside. 


82 


Commentary 


83 


[3-7] Risner’s text for these five paragraphs: ‘Et cum visus comprehendit 
individua ex formis pervenientibus ad ipsum ex duobus individuis, ipse 
comprehendit consimilitudinem duorum individuorum ex similitudine dua- 
rum formarum pervenientium a forma ad visum; et consimilitudo duarum 
formarum non sunt ipsae formae, neque tertia forma propria consimilitudini; 
sed consimilitudo duarum formarum est convenientia illarum in aliquo. Non 
ergo comprehendetur duarum formarum similitudo nisi ex comparatione 
unius ad alteram, et ex comprehensione istius in quo sunt consimiles. Et quia 
visus comprehendit similitudinem, et non est in eo tertia forma, ex qua 
comprehendit similitudinem; visus ergo non comprehendit similitudinem 
duarum formarum nisi ex comparatione unius ad alteram. Et cum ita sit, 
comprehensio ergo sensus visus a consimilitudine formarum, et diversitate 
illarum, non est per solum sensum, sed per comparationem formarum inter 
se’ (R 30:27-36; L l 26 v 16-27; E 2 I5 r A49— B17). 

[8] 1 . ‘ rust-green’: akhdar zinjari. The Latin has viridem myrti, the Latin 
translator having obviously read rayhani (the colour of rayhdn or sweet basil), 
instead ot zinjari, the colour of zinjar (Persian zingar ), rust. See comment (a) to 
Bk I, ch. 4. Arranging a series of colours between the extremes of white and 
black, Qutb al-Dln al-Shlrazi puts Justuqi (pistachio-green) closer to white 
than zinjari ; see Kamal al-DIn, Tanqih , 11, p. 334. 

[ 14 ] I- 4 inference’, in both occurrences in the sentence, translates istidlal. In 
the next sentence it translates the more frequent qiyds. The Latin has ratio and 
signatio for istidlal , and again ratio for qiyds ; cf. R 30:60-1. 

[23] 1. ‘Thus from his perception’: fa-min idrakihi/ex apprehensione ergo eius. 

[ 23 ] 2. ‘or from his perception of the configuration of the total form’: aw min 
idrakihi li-tashakkul jumlat al-sura. Omitted in R 31:35; L l 2 j v 11; L 2 is v Bi5. 

[25] 1. ‘ The faculty of judgement then discerns this form’. A 2 has hadhihi 
al-suwar (these forms), which I take to be an error (note the singular * form' /al- 
sura in the latter part of the sentence). The corresponding Latin text for the 
whole paragraph in Risner’s edition contains only the first sentence and a 
paraphrase of the last sentence: ‘Cognitio autem non est solo sensu. Inten- 
tiones ergo quae comprehenduntur a sensu, quaedam per cognitionem, quae 
per rationem et distinctionem’ (R 3 1:48-50; L x 27 v 24; L 2 I5 V B35-8). 

[25] 2. It will be interesting to compare a passage in Hunayn ibn Ishaq’s Ten 
Treatises on the Eye , in which the ninth-century translator and medical writer 
distinguishes the modes of perception of different visible properties. In the 
following paraphrase of this passage (based on the text edited by Meyerhof, 
Arabic, pp. 108-09) I have tried to keep as close as possible to Hunayn’s 
language. 

Colour, says I^unayn, is the primary object of sight; it is what sight 
perceives ‘first’ and ‘in itself’, and it is not perceptible by any of the other 


II. 3 [31] 

senses. In addition to sensing colour sight ‘senses’ ( ahassa ) and ‘recognizes’ 
{ta e arrafa) the body that possesses the colour, just as the sense of taste senses the 
flavour and the flavoured body. But sight differs from the other senses in that it 
does not wait for the object to reach it but extends itself, by means of the 
intervening air, to reach the coloured object. It is for this reason that sight, 
alone among the senses, is capable of ‘recognizing’ the size and shape, as well 
as colour, of an object, in addition to recognizing the object’s position {wad') 
and distance from the eye. Moreover, sight ‘recognizes’ the object’s move- 
ment ‘although its recognition of movement is not by sense alone but involves 
a certain analogy that is close to sense-perception’ (laysa huwa ta'arrufa hissin 
mutlaqin, Idkin ta'arruju qiyasin min al-maqdyis qaribin min al-hiss). Only touch 
can have a (direct) sensation of these things (size, shape, position, distance, 
movement). But perception {hiss) of them may be had by the other senses in an 
incidental way {bi-tariq min turuq al-a'rad: kata symbebekos) through analogy 
with something previously known. The above account is immediately fol- 
lowed by an example: a man feeling his way in the dark with the help of a stick 
‘knows by analogy’ that he has encountered a hard body when his stick cannot 
go forward, because prior knowledge has taught him that objects may pass 
freely in air but not when impeded by a solid body. 

We are still very far from anything like I. H.’s insistence on the role ot 
comparison or inference and of prior knowledge in every visual perception 
other than the mere sensation of light and colour; but Hunayn’s passage is 
remarkable for its explicit mention of these two central concepts in I. H.’s 
theory. 

[26] I. Reading wa la yudraku fial-hal anna idrakahd bi-qiyas wa tamyiz for wa 
la tudraku fial-hal idh idrakuha, etc., in E 222:12. 

[27] 1. ‘syllogisms’: maqayxs , usually translated ‘inferences’. The subse- 
quent discussion, which includes some concrete examples, makes it clear that 
syllogistic inferences are meant. Paragraphs [27] and [28] are thus rendered in 
Risner’s edition: ‘Et similiter in argumentation et omnibus rationibus qua- 
rum propositiones sunt universales et manifestae non indiget virtus distinctiva 
aliquanto tempore in comprehendendo illarum conclusiones, sed apud intel- 
lectum statim propositions intelligetur conclusio. Et causa in hoc est quod 
virtus distinctiva non arguit per compositionem et ordinationem propositio- 
ns sicut componitur argumentatio per vocabula. Quoniam argumentum 
quod concludit erit secundum verbum et secundum ordinationem propositio- 
num; argumentum autem virtutis distinctivae non est ita, quoniam virtus 
distinctiva comprehendit conclusionem sine indigentia in verbis et sine indi- 
gentia ordinationis propositionum et ordinationis verborum’ (R 32:1-8; the 
same text is in L r 27 v 36-28 r 3 and in L 2 i6 r A2-i2). 

[ 31 ] 1* ‘ their truth’: §ihhataha. 


13 


L 


84 Commentary 

[31] 2. ‘and their conclusions true’: wa nata’ijuha $adiqa/et conclusions fuerint 
verae. 

[31] 3. * the truth’ (of this conclusion): $ihhatuha. 

[31] 4- ‘ in the imagination’ : fi al-wahm/in animam : on wahm as the word 
corresponding to the Greek phantasia , see Afnan, Philosophical Lexicon , 
pp. 319-20; Rahman, Avicenna's Psychology , pp. 80-83. 

[31] 5. In Risner’s text (and in and L 2 ) the whole paragraph is rendered as 
follows: ‘Et similiter sunt omnes intentiones, quae comprehenduntur per 
rationem, quando propositiones earum fuerint manifestae, et conclusiones 
fuerint verae. Quoniam quando anima intellexerit conclusionem esse veram, 
deinde multoties venerit in animam, erit conclusio quasi propositio manifesta; 
et sic, quando anima viderit propositionem, statim intelliget conclusionem 
sine indigentia argumentationis iterandae” (R 32:18-22; L r 28 r i3-i7; L 2 
16^27-32). 

[32] 1. In his kitab fi Hall shukuk Kitab Uqlidis fi al-U$ul wa sharh ma'amh, 
I. H. refers to Euclid’s common notions, koinai ennoiai, as al-xxlum al-uwal 
(primary notions), adding that ‘in some translations’ they are called al-'ulum 
al-muta arafa (recognized or generally accepted notions; Istanbul University 
Library MS 800, p. 28). He argues here (pp. 28-37) for the empirical basis of 
these notions in terms similar to those in Optics , 11,3(32-35]). Wl-'ulum 
al-uwaV is also the expression used by him in his Maqala fi Sharh mu$adardt 
Kitab Uqlidis (ed. Sude, p. 32 f.). The Latin version of the Optics translates: 
propositiones primae. 

[32] 2. ‘ native to the mind, and not [achieved] by means of inference’: 
bi-fitrat al-'aql wa laysa idrakuha bi-qiyas/per naturam et intellectum, non per 
rationem. 

[32] 3. In this paragraph: ‘faculty of judgement’ corresponds to al-tamyiz 
(or al-quwwa al-mumayyiza)/ distinctio (or virtus distinctiva ), ‘inference’ to qiyas/ 
ratio , ‘mind’ (or ‘intellect’) to * aql/intellectus , and ‘notion’ to ma/nd/intentio. 
‘Understanding’ corresponds to fahm, which the Latin translation renders by a 
verb, intelligere . And, as elsewhere, ‘to perceive’ is adraka/ comprehendere. 

[34] 1. ‘immediately’: bi-al-badiha/statim. 

[35] 1. 4 an inspection . . . was made’. Preferring the reading in A 2 , alladhi 
yustaqra , to that in E, alladhx yastaqrx . 

[ 38 ] x. 4 at the beginning of awareness’: 'irida awwal al-tanabbuh. 

[38] 2. ‘perfectly [developed] judgement’: kamil al-tamyiz. See comment (a) 
to Bk II. 

[38] 3- 4 say two rare fruits’: ka-tuhfatayn/sicut duo poma. The singular tuhfa, 
like turfa , also generally denotes an object with unusual or valued qualities that 
make it worthy of being offered as a gift. I. H. may have been thinking of 
embellished objects (?toys) of some sort. 


II. 3 [44] 85 

[42] 1. Here, in one sentence, the Arabic uses ma'na to mean both the 
qualities or properties of visible objects ( al-ma c anx allatx tatakarraru fi al - 
mubsarat) and the notions corresponding to these properties in the soul 
(ma c aniha fial-nafs). See also [35]. 

[43] 1. ‘apprehends’: taktasib/acquirit. 

[44] 1. ‘ Now the particular properties . . . composed of the particular 
properties’. R: ‘Intentiones particulares sunt multae, sed generaliter dividun- 
tur in 22, et sunt: lux, color, remotio, situs, corporeitas, figura, magnitudo, 
continuum, discretio et separatio, numerus, motus, quies, asperitas, levitas, 
diaphanitas, spissitudo, umbra, obscuritas, pulchritudo, turpitudo, consimi- 
litudo, et diversitas in omnibus intentionibus particularibus et in omnibus 
formis compositis ex intentionibus particularibus’. 

For notes on the translation of terms denoting the particular properties, see 
below. 

At the beginning of Book 11 of his Optica , Ptolemy enumerates seven visible 
properties: ‘Dicimus ergo quod uisus cognoscit corpus, magnitudinem, 
colorem, figuram, situm, motumet quietem’, though he goes on immediately 
to add light and opacity (the latter being a quality which hinders the 
penetration of visual rays) as conditions for perceiving these properties: 
‘Nichil autem ex his cognoscit uisus sine aliquo lucido et quolibet prohibente 
penetrationem’ ( Ptol . Opt., 11, 2). A direct quotation of this passage in I. H.’s 
al-Shukuk e ala Batlamyus (pp. 64-65) establishes the following equivalences 
between expressions in the Latin version of Ptolemy’s book and the non- 
extant Arabic translation from which it was made: uisus/basar , cognoscere/ 
e araja , corpus/ jism, magnitudo /'iz am, color/lawn , figura/shakl , situs/wad\ motus! 
haraka , quies/sukiin. Ptolemy’s list and the much longer one in I. H. call to 
mind Aristotle’s ‘common sensibles’, or properties perceptible by more than 
one sense: movement, rest, number, unity, shape, size, duration (references to 
Aristotle’s De anima , De sensu and De memoria are in Ross, Aristotle , p. 138). 
But it is, of course, as objects of vision that Ptolemy and I. H. are interested in 
the properties they mention. The possible historical connection between, on 
the one hand, Ptolemy’s and I. H.’s ‘visible properties’ and, on the other, 
Aristotle’s ‘common sensibles’, especially as properties incidentally perceived 
through the sense of sight, deserves a full study. This would have to deal with all 
possible intermediaries. As things stand, however, I am not inclined to believe 
that it would be helpful to try to explain Ptolemy’s and I. H. ’s treatment of 
visual perception in terms of Aristotle’s own doctrines and concerns. It would 
seem to me that such an approach can lead only to confusion. 

The Sincere Brethren (second half of the tenth century a. d.), it will be 
harmless to note, count ten objects of visual perception: light, darkness, 
colour, surface, body, shape, distance, movement, rest and position. Of these 


86 


Commentary 


ten, the first two only are perceptible ‘truly and in themselves’. But although 
light and darkness are both visible, only the former makes the perception of 
the other properties possible. Bodies are visible by their surfaces and these are 
seen through their colour. And since bodies are never without shape, position, 
distance and movement (or rest), all these are said to be visible by accident 
(bi-al-'arad) . Moreover, light and darkness are ‘spiritual colours’, but black 
and white are ‘corporeal’; light and darkness permeate the transparent bodies 
in the same way as the spirit ( pneuma ) permeates the living body; and so on 
(. Rasa’il , n, pp. 408-09; see above [25], note 1). Interesting though these 
remarks may be, they clearly belong to a universe of discourse quite other than 
that of I. H.’s Optics. 

[44] 2. ‘writing and drawing’: al-kitaba wa al-nuqush/scriptura et pictura. For 
problems posed by translating nuqiish, see I, 2(22], note 1. Note that colour is 
not mentioned here among categories under which nuqiish are subsumed. 

[44] 3- ‘which are modes of configuration’: allati hiya min al-tashakkul. 
Omitted in R 34:19; L f 29 v i8; L 2 i7 r A7. 

[44] 4. ‘configuration of the form of the face’: tashakkul surat al-wajh/figura 
formae faciei. Here the Latin translator has no word for tashakkul other than 
figura which he uses in the same sentence and elsewhere for shakl (shape). In 
[47] he hits on figuratio as an equivalent for tashakkul. 

[45] 1 . The whole paragraph is reduced in Risner’s text (and in L r and L 2 ) to 
the following: ‘Et cum ita sit, distinctio et argumentatio virtutis distinctivae, 
et cognitio formarum et signorum eorum non erunt nisi ex cognitione vel 
distinctione virtutis distinctivae ex formis pervenientibus intra concavum 
nervi communis, apud comprehensionem ultimi sentientis illas, et ex cogni- 
tione signorum formarum istarum’ (R 34:31-34; L x 29^0-34; L 2 17^24-30). 

[46] 1. In this paragraph, if ‘surface of the sentient organ’ (sath al-'udw 
al-hass/ superficies membri sentientis) refers to the posterior surface of the compo- 
site body consisting of the crystalline and vitreous humours, then I. H. here 
applies ‘sentient organ’ (al- e udw al-hass /membrum sentiens) to the whole of that 
composite body. If, on the other hand, ‘surface of the sentient organ’ refers to 
the front surface of the crystalline humour, then I. H. implies here that the 
‘sentient body’ ( al-jism al-hass /corpus sentiens) or visual spirit extends all the 
way to that front surface. See note on II, 2[i 1]. 

[47] 1. ‘configuration’: tashakkul. R: figuratione. See [44], notes 3 and 4. 

[52] 1 . Here essential light ( e.g . of the sun) is assumed to be devoid of 
colour. Compare II, 2[i2, 113] where it is asserted that self-luminous bodies 
possess ‘something like colour’ in addition to their luminosity. 

[53] 1. ‘mfidmtf-green’. See comment (a) to Bkl, ch. 4; and note on I, 
6[i 14]. The Latin has two colours (ui riditas profunda f et juscitas) for the three 
colours mentioned in the Arabic text (al-kuhli wa al-khamri wa al-misannx). 


II. 3 [60-61] 87 

[57] 1. 1 revolving’. The Arabic is haraka , motion ( R : motus ), later specified 
as motion in a circle, ‘ ala al-istidara. 

[57] 2. Assuming the spinning top ( duwwama/trochus ) to be conoidal in 
shape, and looking at it from above, its ‘visible surface’ will be the upper part 
down to the ‘circumference’ or large circle below which it tapers off to the 
point on which it spins. The ‘neck’ may refer to a small (Pcylindrical) 
protrusion at the middle of this visible part. Again looking at the spinning top 
from above, any point on any of the multi-coloured lines drawn from the 
middle of the visible part (or from the ‘neck’) down to the ‘circumference’ will 
trace out a circle in the eye. Cf Ptol. Opt., 11, 82, 96 and 98, where the trocus 
seems to be a circular disc; see Lejeune’s n. 77 on p. 60. The interpretation of 
the duwwama as a spinning top of the kind that children play with is suggested 
by Kamal al-Dln; see Tanqih , 1, p. 174. See also III, 7[26i]. In III, 7(266] al-raha 
is the name used for the millstone. 

[58] 1. ‘i.e. at every instant’. Reading wa ft kulli dnin , as in A 2 . E omits wa. 

[60— 61] An argument for the finite speed of light? It is to be proved in these two 

paragraphs that perception of light ‘as such’ (and of colour ‘as such’) requires 
the lapse of a certain interval of time, however small; that is to say, that the 
instant at which such perception occurs is later than that at which the surface of 
the eye first comes into contact with the illuminated air. For this purpose I. H. 
employs an argument from analogy with the physical situation in which 
external light passes through apertures to objects placed behind them. The 
passage of light from the eye to the common nerve, he says, is analogous to its 
passage from the aperture to the opposite body; and he expressly states that 
‘the light’s arrival ( wusul ) from the aperture at the body facing the aperture 
must take place in time, though this time is imperceptible’. If, along the path 
from the aperture to the illuminated body, the light arrives at one point after 
another, then, he asserts, we have to do with movement ‘and movement must 
take place in time’ . But what if the intervening air received the light all at once? 
I. H.’s reply is that on this hypothesis, too, we must conclude that ‘the 
occurrence of the light in the air after the air has had no light in it must also take 
place in time’. It is this conclusion which the subsequent argument is intended 
to prove. 

The argument concerns the entering of the light into the aperture as a screen 
covering the aperture is raised, thereby gradually exposing the air inside the 
aperture to the incoming light. Basically it runs as follows. Since only bodies 
and surfaces can receive light, the air in the aperture will receive the incoming 
light only when a finite portion of it has been exposed, and this condition will 
not be satisfied until after the edge of the covering screen has moved over the 
opening for the duration of more than one instant. The reason is that at the first 
instant of the screen’s movement only a dimensionless point or a line without 


88 


Commentary 


breadth will have been exposed, and these are incapable of receiving the light. 
Time must elapse between the instant at which the screen has begun to slide 
across the aperture and that at which the light will occupy a finite part of the air 
inside the aperture, namely the time required to slide the edge of the screen 
over a finite area. 

As Kamal al-Dln has pointed out, the argument fails to prove the successive 
movement of light along the distance between the aperture and the opposite 
body ( Tanqxh , i, p. 177; see also Najlf, al-Hasan , pp. 118-20; Schramm, Weg, 
pp. 235 ff.). Nor was the argument meant to establish this conclusion, being 
predicated on the hypothesis that the whole air has received the light at once. 
Rather it was designed to show that the light will take time to spread laterally 
over a finite area on the surface of the object as the screen is raised. This would 
of course parallel the situation in vision when the eyelids are opened to receive 
the light. In other words, I. H. is arguing that the sensation of light and colour 
requires time because it takes time for them to cover a finite area on the surface 
of the eye and, hence, on the crystalline’s surface. 

That I. H. had no experimental proof of the finite speed of light is not 
surprising; such a proof was not forthcoming for centuries after his time. 
However, unlike Aristotle ( De anima, 11, 7; De sensu , vi) and al-Kindi ( De 
aspectibus , Proposition 1 5) before him, and many others after him in the Islamic 
world and in Europe down to the early seventeenth century, he had theoretical 
reasons for believing that light took time to travel from one place to another, a 
doctrine which we find explicitly stated in the Optics. In Bk VII, for example, 
I. H. asserts that light moves faster in a rarer medium like air, where it 
encounters less resistance, than in a denser medium like water or glass, where 
the resistance is greater. Behind this and similar assertions was a certain 
approach to the study of motion dominated by a concept of causality borrowed 
from the kalam ( cf. Sabra, Theories of Light, pp. 72-78, 93-99). His belief was 
later shared by Kamal al-Dm who, in the passage just cited, compares the 
movement of light to the temporal propagation of sound and heat. 

[60] 1. ‘ For assume that . . . which adjoins the air’. The English translation 
deliberately preserves all the ambiguities of the Arabic. ‘Its surface’ (wajh) 
refers to the surface through which the light enters into the aperture ; ‘that part’ 
probably refers to the part of the air which first comes into contact with the 
light, rather than to the ‘part of light’; and ‘that air’ must refer to the air in 
contact with ‘the first part of the aperture’ to be exposed to the light. 

[62] 1. ‘ lacks the delicacy’. This translates waghila? al-hiss (the second word 
thus pointed and vowelled in A 2 ). Risner’s et errorem eius (38:4) represents the 
Latin translator’s reading of the Arabic words as waghalat al-hiss. 

[67-93] Perception of distance: terminology. Unless the word is otherwise 
qualified, ‘distance’ ifud/remotio) always means distance or remoteness of a 


II. 3 [76] 89 

visible object from the eye of the observer. Masdfa (spatium) is the word 
usually used by I. H. for the space between two visible points or objects; 

I translate it in this context by ‘interval’. For the length of distance he uses 
kammiyya (quantity or measure) and miqdar (magnitude or size) with no 
apparent preference for the one or the other. He means degree or extent of 
remoteness, but only in a vague sense of ‘degree’; he is not thinking of an exact 
measure in terms of unit length (cf [155]). The Latin text renders kammiyya by 
quantitas and miqdar by mensura (also by quantitas — cf [76]). The English 
translation employs ‘magnitude’ for both kammiyya and miqdar throughout 
the discussion of distance. ‘Direction’ here translates jiha ( pars ; elsewhere: 
locus , ubitas), i.e. the location of a visible object in relation to the viewer. 
‘Position’ stands for wadf (situs), which is generally to be distinguished from 
‘place’ (mawdi* /locus ) . 

[67] 1. ‘ perception of where the object is’: idrak mawdi e al-mubsar/ 
comprehensio loci rei visae. 

[67] 2. ‘ perception of an object in its own place’: idrak al-mubsar ft mawdi' ih/ 
comprehensio rei visae in loco suo. 

[ 67 ] 3 - ‘ direction’: wa min al-jiha. The equivalent in Risner is: et ex parte 
universi. 

[69] I. ‘ position’: al-wad'/situs loci. See terminological remarks on [67—93]. 

[ 70 ] 1. The sentence is omitted in R. 

[ 7 1] i.‘ the ray’s extremities’. These must be points on the base of the cone 
of vision, the ‘ray’ being here, as in many other places, identical with the visual 
cone. Risner supplies the following title for this paragraph: ‘ Visio non fit radiis 
ab oculo emissis’, thus (correctly) contradicting the misleading title he 
inserted before I, 6[6 1 ] : ‘Visio videtur fieri per synaugeia , id est receptos simul 
et emissos radios’ (R 15:16), which seriously misrepresents I. H.’s argument. 

[ 74 ] 1. ‘ In order to perceive distance . . . for clarification only’. R: ‘Sed 
virtus distinctiva non indiget in comprehensione remotionis rei visae ad 
dividendum ea, quae divisimus, quoniam non secamus hoc, nisi gratia 
declarandi’. An example of perhaps literal but poorly informative translation. 
Fassala is the Arabic verb here rendered by dividere and secare. 

[76] 1. ‘ and their magnitudes ascertained’: wa yatahaqqaqu miqdar ahu/et 
certifcatur eorum quantitas . 

[76] 2. ‘ is perceived and realized’: yudraku wa yutahaqqaqu/compre- 
henditur . . . et certificatur . 

[ 76 ] 3 . ‘ ordered and connected bodies’: ajsdm murattaba mutta$ila/corpora 
ordinata continua. This has also been translated as ‘a series of continuous 
bodies’. 

[ 76 ] 4- ‘ next to the viewer’: yah al-insan al-na^ir/in parte aspicientis .* The 
Arabic expression might also refer to the pupil of the eye, insan al- e ayn. 


90 


Commentary 


[78] 1. 1 does not perceive correctly and with certainty’: laysa huwa idrdkan 
sahihan mutayaqqanan/non comprehenduntur vera comprehensione et certificata. 

[78] 2. ‘ does not distinctly perceive': laysa yudrikuha idrdkan muhaqqaqan/non 
comprehenduntur a visu vera comprehensione. I have used ‘distinct’ for muhaqqaq 
throughout this paragraph. 

[79] 1. ‘ It will therefore appear from this consideration’: fa-ya^haru min 
hadhd al-i'tibar/Ex ista ergo experimentatione apparet . The i e tibdr involved here (as 
in some other places) is clearly an argument based on readily available 
observations, and not an experiment proper; see note on I, i[6], under xtibar. 

[81] 1. ‘except by inference’: ilia bi-al-istidlal/nisi per argumentationem. 

[81] 2. ‘ to compare’ and ‘to estimate’ here render qdsa ila and qasa hi 
respectively. The Latin here preserves the distinction, using comparare (or 
comparatio) for the former, and mensurare (or mensuratio) for the latter. See, 
however, [135], note 3. 

[82] 1. ‘two persons’: the singular is shakh$ , the outward appearance or form 
of a man or of an object. 

[86] i.‘ are judged by a perception of the faculty of judgement’: tudraku 
bi-al-tamyiz min idrak al-quwwa al-numayyizaj . . . ex comprehensione virtutis 
distinctivae. 

[86] 2. ‘ and by the occurrence of this thing in the soul and its becoming 
unconsciously established [there] over the course of time’: wa-istiqrarihi e ala 
marri al-zamani min haythu lam yuhassa (or tuhissa) bi-istiqrarihi. Omitted in 
R 41:32; L t 35 v 35 ;L 2 20 v A4. 

[87] 1. ‘the faculty of judgement immediately conjectures . . /: al-quwu/a 
al-mumayyiza tahdisu fihali idrakiha e ald/virtus distinctiva statim cognoscit .... 

[87] 2. The context requires the translation of qdsa bi - in this paragraph as ‘to 
compare with’ not ‘to estimate (or measure) by’. The Latin consistently 
employs comparare . The point made here by I. H. is the basis of his explanation 
of the ‘moon illusion’ in Bk VII of the Optics ; see Sabra, ‘Psychology versus 
Mathematics: Ptolemy and Alhazen’. 

[88] 1. ‘by means of this comparison’: bi-hadha al-qiyas/per istam argumenta- 
tionem. 

[88] 2. ‘This conjecture’: wa hadha al-hads/Et ista argumentatio . 

[88] 3. ‘by conjecture or with certainty’: bi-al-hads wa al-tayaqqun /per argu- 
mentationem et certificationem. 

[89] I - ‘ may conjecture’: wa qad tahdisu/Et forte aestimabit. See [135], note 5 
for a comparison with Ptolemy. 

[89] 2. ‘ if the distance’. Reading in kdna buduhu in place of A 2 ’s and E’s wa 
kana bu e duhu (though the object’s distance). R: si remotio eius. 

[9X] 1 ‘or estimated their magnitude’: wa lam ya e tabir miqdaraha . R: nec 
mensurauerit quantitates eorum. 


II. 3 [103] 91 

[94-120] Perception of position: terminology. ‘Position’ ( wa^/situs ) is used 
generally to cover three cases: (1) ‘opposition’ ( muqabala/ oppositio ), i.e. the 
localization of the visible object in space (which, as I. H. explains in [95], 
involves both the distance and the direction of the object); (2) the orientation 
of a surface, edge or line with respect to the eye; and (3) the position of objects 
or of parts of objects relative to one another. I. H.’s use of the word for 
direction, jiha/locus (elsewhere, pars , ubitas), is not easy to render consistently 
by one word in English; I have used ‘direction’ and ‘location’ in the present 
context. The Latin text employs situs both for ‘position’ ( wad* ) in the general 
sense and for ‘orientation’ ( nusba ). I. H. has a word, muwajaha, for the frontal 
orientation of a surface or line with respect to the eye. The Latin translates this, 
apparently with self-conscious inadequacy, as oppositio recta , oppositio directa , 
oppositio facialis. 

[94] I - ‘ species’: anwd c Imodos. 

[95] 1. The Latin uses situs for both position ( wad c ) and orientation ( nu$ba ); 
see note on [94-120]. 

[95] 2. ‘ when the eye faces in the object’s direction’: Unda muhadhat al-basar 
li-al-jiha. The whole sentence in R 42:53-4, 37 r i3, and L 2 21^43-4: 

quoniam visus non comprehendit rem visam nisi ex oppositione. 

[95] 3- ‘ Now directions . . . are perceived by the sense and by judgement’: 
wa al-jihat yudrikuha al-hiss wa yudrikuha al-tamyxz/ et loca quae comprehenduntur a 
sensu f comprehenduntur a distinctione . 

[95] 4- ‘ sense and judgement’: al-hiss wa al-tamyiz/sensus et distinctio . 

[95] 5- ‘by imagination and discernment’: bi-al-takhayyul wa al-tamyxz! per 
imaginationem. 

[97] i.‘ the direction’: al-samt/verticatio. The idea that sight is immediately 
conscious of the direction of rays (viz. their position relative to the visual axis) 
is in Ptolemy; see Lejeune, Euclide etPtolemee , esp. pp. 88, 98. Note, however, 
that I. H. goes on in the following paragraphs to give an account in which ‘the 
faculty ofjudgement’ plays an essential part (see esp. [99]). 

[99] 1. ‘ orientation of the eye’: wad' al-ba$ar/ situs [visus]. ‘Position ofthe eye’ 
would be a more consistent translation but also more ambiguous. It is clear that 
I. H. is thinking ofthe eyeball as being turned towards the object seen. 

[101] i.‘ conjectural and uncertain’: maznunan ghayra mutayaqqan/ aestimatus , 
non certificate. 

[102] I. ‘frontality and inclination’: al-muwajaha wa al-mayl! directam oppo- 
sitionem et obliquationem. See note on [94-120]. 

[103] 1. 4 extremities [or edges]’: ttihay at/ termini. 

[103] 2. ‘lines and intervals parallel to [or] collinear with the radial lines’: 
al-khutut wa al-masafat al-muwaziya li-khutut al-shua" al-musamita laha/lineae et 
spatia aequidistantia lineis radialibus et respicientia ipsas. 


92 


Commentary 


93 


[10 4] i. ‘the inclination or frontality of surfaces . . . mayla al-su(uhi . . . wa 
muwdjahatahd/directionem et obliquationem superficierum .... See [102], note 1. 

[105] 1. ‘by means of conjecture and signs’: bi-al-hads wa al-amarat/per 
aestimationem et signa. 

[107] 1. See [103], note 2, also [109], note 1. 

[107] 2. ‘in the direction of opposition’: fx samt al-muwajaha/ in verticatione 
oppositionis. See preceding note. 

[109] i.‘ perpendicular to one of the radial lines’. ‘One’ here translates ba'd, 
which means one or more. Since the radial lines are not parallel to one another 
only one of them can be perpendicular to a given line. The Latin has: 
perpendiculares super lineas radiales. 

[109] 2. ‘ it perceives the locations of their extremities’: yudriku al-jihatayn 
allatayn taliyan tarafay . . . / comprehendet duas ubitates sequentes extremitates .... 
The Latin uses ubitas for jiha throughout this paragraph. 

[111] 1. ‘it will merely guess their positions’: wa innama yahdisu 'ala awdd'ihd 
hadsan/sed accipit situm eorum aestimatione . 

[112] 1. "if the form ... is clear and distinct’: . . . bayyina muhaqqaqa/ 

. . . manifesta et certificata. 

[112] 2. ‘the locations of their opposed extremities’: li-jihati tarafayhi al - 
mutaqabilayn/ubitatum extremitatum eius. 

[112] 3 . ‘and estimate their magnitudes’: wa ya'tabiru miqdar aha/ et con - 
siderabit quantitatem eorum. 

[H3 ]i.‘ the form is indistinct’: . . . mushtabiha/. . .juerit non manifesta. 

[11 3] 2- ‘or it is clear and the inclination not excessive’: aw kdnat bayyina wa 
lam yakun al-maylu mufritan/aut Juerit manifesta sed obliquatio Juerit maxima 
(R 46:32)/^ Juerit manifesta sed obliquatio non Juerit maxima (L t 40 r l5-i6; L 2 
2 3 r AlI-I2). 

[I*S] I. ‘it will judge the object to be frontally orientated’: hakama bi-al- 
muwdjaha/et sic iudicabit ipsam rem visam esse directam . 

[119] 1. ‘in the forward-backward direction’: fx al-taqaddum wa al - 
ta 3 akhkhur/ secundum accessionem et remotionem. 

[II9]2. ‘ whether they are prominent or depressed’: Jx al-shukhus wa al- 
ghu 3 ur/ secundum preeminentiam et projundationem. 

[121] 1. ‘the extension of a body in the three dimensions’. Here, and 
throughout the discussion of solidity ( tajassum/corporeitas ), ‘dimension’ 
corresponds to bud , the same word I. H. has been using for distance or 
remoteness from the eye. The Latin uses two words to distinguish the two 
senses of bud, namely remotio and dimensio. 

[121] 2. ‘by knowledge and experiment’: bi-al-'ilm wa al-i'tibar. Omitted 
in R. 

[126] 1. ‘by prior knowledge’: bi-taqaddum al-'ilm. 


H. 3 [US] 

[127-134] Perception of shape : terminology. I. H. uses shakl for both two- 
dimensional and three-dimensional, or bodily, shapes, while reserving hay 3 a 
for the latter. Hay 3 a thus corresponds here to a common usage of the English 
‘form’. But since ‘form’ has been chosen to translate $ura, I have used ‘shape’ 
and ‘figure’ for shakl and hay 3 a respectively. The Latin translation has figura for 
shakl , and renders hay 3 a by forma , which also always translates $ura. This may 
lead to misunderstanding or at least to difficulty in following the text (see 
[128]). ‘Periphery’ muhxtj circumferentia, is the outline of an object (or of part of 
an object’s surface). ‘Limit’, nihay a! terminus, is a bounding line of a surface, or 
the edge of a surface. ‘Gibbosity’ and ‘convexity’ stand for one word, tahdxb/ 
gibbositas. 

[127] I. ‘ the bodily shape of the object’: shakl tajassum al-mub$ar/figura 
corporeitatis rex visae. The expression is I. H. ’s definition o (hay 3 a in this context. 

[132] 1. breadths’: 'urud/latitudinum, i.e. protrusions in the lateral direction 
as distinguished from protrusions in the vertical or forward-backward 
direction. 

[135] the size, or magnitude of a visible object’: al-'izam, wa huwa miqdar 
al-mubsar. Thus I. H. introduces 'izam and miqdar as synonyms and subse- 
quently uses them as such. Sometimes he joins them together in the construct: 
miqdar al-'izam . In general, the English translation has ‘size’ for 'izam and 
‘magnitude* for miqdar, but deviates from this rule in some cases to avoid 
awkwardness of expression or to conform with normal English usage. ‘Size’ is 
also used for miqdar al-'izam, and for qadr, which occurs twice in the section 
concerned with size, and in translating the expression miqdar al-zdwiy a (size of 
an angle). The Latin translation consistently renders 'izam as magnitudo, miqdar 
as quantitas, and miqdar al-'izam as quantitas magnitudinis . 

[135] 2. ‘The manner of perceiving size ... is an uncertain subject’: . . . min 
al-ma'dnx al-multabisa/ . . . ex intentionibus dubitabilibus . 

[135] 3. 4 estimates . . . by’: yaqxsu . . . hi-i comparat ... ad. Compare [81], 
note 2. 

[135] 4. Euclid’s Optics , Definition iv: ‘. . , Magnitudes seen through larger 
angles appear larger; those seen through smaller angles appear smaller; and 
those seen through equal angles appear to be equal’. Cf Ver Eecke (trans.), 
UOptique [d’Euclide], p. 1. On perception of size in Euclid and Ptolemy, see 
Lejeune, Euclide et Ptolemee, pp. 95-103. 

[135] 5- ‘ Some of them, however, believe’: wa ba'duhum yard. Ba'd means 
one, or more than one. Compare the following sentence in Ptolemy’s Optica , 
which is undoubtedly the source of I. H. ’s report: ‘non debemus arbitrari illos 
esse sufficientes qui dixerunt distantia tantum debere addi super id quod de 
angulis et quod eis attributum est, diuersitatem uero positionum uocari 
insensibilem . . .’ ( Ptol . Opt., 45:6-9). Lejeune quotes these words and points 


94 


Commentary 


95 


out the implication that Ptolemy was not the first to consider distance a factor 
in estimating size; see Euclide et Ptolemee , p. 103 and n. 1. For the effect of 
Ptolemy’s view on I. H. ’s treatment of the ‘moon illusion’ problem, see Sabra, 
‘Psychology versus Mathematics: Ptolemy and Alhazen on the Moon 
Illusion’. 

In his discussion of the perception of size Ptolemy considers two cases in 
which two (linear) magnitudes in the same plane are viewed (PtoL Opt ., 11, 
56-58). In each of the two cases the two magnitudes subtend the same angle at 
the apex of the visual cone, placed within the eye. In the first case, however, 
the magnitudes are unequally distant from the eye and similarly oriented to 
the visual axis, whereas in the second case they are equally distant from the eye 
but differently oriented, one of them being placed at right angles to the axis. 
Ptolemy’s concluding statement is that, unless the difference between the 
distances or orientations is imperceptible, the two magnitudes will ‘appear’ as 
unequal: 

Videtur autem id quod ex consuetudine fit in mensura istarum rerum ad inuicem, 
ex opinione procedere, non ex natura situs neque distantie. Cum enim quedam 
sensibilitas fit ex angulis, et uidentur quedam res procliues existentes et quedam 
remote, et quislibet opinetur unamquamque istarum minorem esse, quamuis sit 
una, in aspectu autem non inueniatur altera minor altera, sed equalis, existimamus 
unam ex eis maiorem esse. Quoniam, cum diuersitas procliuitatis et distantie fuerit 
insensibilis, apparent due res equales; et cum fuerit sensibilis, fit diuerso modo ( Ptol . 
Opt., 11, 58). 

The similarity between key words in this paragraph and corresponding 
expressions repeatedly employed by I. H. in discussions of position- and 
size-perception (e.g. [1 12-1 13, 135 ff.]) are too obvious to escape notice: 
consuetudo/i'tiyad , opinio /hads or zann, natura situs /liaqiqat al-wad', in aspectu /bi- 
al-badiha, existimare/hadasa or zanna. Thus one is tempted, here as in several 
other places, to read some of I. H. ’s statements back into Ptolemy’s Optica , on 
the assumption that it was from the Arabic version of Ptolemy’s treatise that 
I. H. first adopted these expressions. But the temptation should perhaps be 
resisted in this case: Lejeune seems to be right when he remarks that Ptolemy 
(unlike I. H.) does not go so far as to say actually that perception of the 
difference in size is based in these cases on a judgement (or inference) which takes 
into account the three factors involved: angle of vision, the object’s distance 
from the eye and its orientation (see his Euclide et Ptolemee, pp. 98-99). See 
[89], note 1. 

[135] 6. ‘estimation’: aUqiy as /comparatione. See [135], note 3. 

[135] 7. ‘position’: li-wadl'ihi/ situs eius. I. H. means orientation, for which he 
has a special word (nu$ba) not used in this instance — see note on [94-120]; and 
the quote from Ptolemy’s Optica (which has situs ) in [135], note 5. 


II. 3 [148] 

[136] 1. A statement of ‘the size-distance constancy principle’, as modern 
psychologists have called it. The principle, which derives from Ptolemy, is 
said in this paragraph, and the following ones, to hold only for ‘moderate’ 
distances. Excessively remote objects (e.g. the stars) appear to be smaller than 
they are; see III, 7[ 1 3—23] and related notes. 

[136] 2. ‘ moves through a moderately large distance away from the eye’: 
taba'ada 'an al-basar miqdaran laysa bi-al-mutafawit /fuerit elongata a visu. 

[137] i-‘ the farthest among them’. Reading bud ab'adiha, with A 2 . 
E (274:14) mistakenly has bud ab'adiha. 

[140] 1. ‘only through their estimation by means of the angles produced by 
the objects’: innama huwa min qiyasiha bi-al-zawaya faqat allati tuhdithuha 
al-mubsarat/ex comparatione ad angulos tantum qui fiunt ex visibilibus. Compare 
[81], note 2. 

[140] 2. ‘consideration’: i'tibdr/Experimentatione .... 

[141] 1. ‘let us now show exactly’: fa-inna nuharrir/certificemus . Tah rir carries 
the sense of precision or exactness. See [161], note 2. 

[141] 2. ‘ inference and judgement’: al-qiyas wa al-tamyxz! argumentationem et 
distinctionem . 

[l4l]3.‘by inference and judgement’: bi-al-qiyds wa al-tamyiz/ratione et 
argumentatione. 

[141] 4 1 criterion’: a$l/ radix. 

[142] 1. ‘ considering’: i'tibar/ consider atio. 

[143] i. For a case in which the difference between the two distances 
mentioned becomes critical, see III, 7^4-25] and the related note. 

[144] I. ‘the directions’: al-sumut/verticationes. 

[144] 2. See [97], note 1. 

[144] 3. ‘will form an image’: takhayyalat/imaginabitur. The verb takhayyala 
is usually rendered as ‘to imagine’, but without the connotation that what is 
imagined is also imaginary (or unreal). 

[144] 4. ‘diameters of the object’: aqtar al-mub$ar / diametri rei visae. That is, 
the largest intervals between extreme points on the object. 

[146] 1. ‘ imagines’. See [144], note 3. 

[147] i.‘ comparing . . . with’: bi-qiyas . . . ild/per comparationem . . . ad. 

[148] i.‘ that sight perceives the size ... by the angle alone’: anna al-ba^ara 
yudriku miqdara 'izami al-mub$ari <min qiyasi 'i?ami aUmub$ari> bi-miqddri 
bu'dihi ma'a al-qiyasi bi-al-zawiyati faqat/ quod visus non comprehends quantitatem 
magnitudinis rei visae nisi ex comparatione magnitudinis rei visae ad quantitatem 
remotionis eius cum comparatione ad angulum, non ex comparatione ad angulum 
tantum. The Arabic text (unlike the Latin translation) almost always maintains 
the distinction between qasa . . . bi- (to estimate or measure . . . by) and 
qasa . . . ila (to compare . . . with). An exception is noted in [87], note 2. 



96 


Commentary 


[150] 1. In this and the following paragraph ‘to measure’ translates qaddara 
(or qadara), to estimate the size, extent or quantity ( qadr ) of something. The 
Latin employs mensurare. 

[151] 1- ‘as a result of measuring it by our body’: bi-misahat jism al-insdn 
lahu/per mensuram corporis hominis. 

[151] 2. ‘comprehended’: mafhuma/intelliguntur. 

[151] 3. ‘will comprehend’: tajham/intelliget. 

[154] i.‘ verified’: fa-yatahaqqaq/certificabitur. 

[154] 2. ‘ determined’: taf)arrara(t) . 

[155] 1 ‘a determinate, imagined magnitude’: miqdar mutakhayyal mahsur/ 
quantitatem determinatam. See [144], note 3. 

[156] 1. From here to the end of the paragraph ‘distance’ translates both 
masafa and bud. See note on [67-93]; and [157], note 1. 

[157] 1. Here and in the following paragraphs the distinction between 
‘interval’ (masafa/ spatium) and ‘distance’ (bu d/remotio) can be important for 
following the argument: distance is a line (or magnitude of a line) from the eye 
to a point in space; an interval could be a segment of that line at a variable 
distance from the eye. 

[159] 1. On colour as a clue to distance, see III, 7[39], note 1; and III, 7[25o], 
note 2. 

[160] 1 . Let O be an object visible from distance d, and let the magnitude of 
O be correctly perceived from d\ let p be a portion of O that bears a sensible 
ratio to O; d is then said to be a ‘moderate distance’ with respect to the object O 
if the magnitude o ip is perceptible from d. This anticipates the discussions in 
Bk III; see III, 7(13-23] and related notes. See also [169]. 

[161] 1. ‘ the sentient infers the size’: al-hassu yastadillu 'ala miqdar al-'i%am/ 
sentiens recipit significationem super quantitatem magnitudinis . 

[161] 2. ‘perfectly accurate’: ft ghdyat al-taharrur/in fine certitudinis. See [141], 
note 1. 

[162] 1. ‘and . . . infers’: wa istadalla/et cognoverit. 

[163] 1. ‘by sensation or inference’: bi-al-hiss aw bi-al-istidlal/per sensum aut 
per significationem. 

[164] i.‘ ascertained’, ‘established’, ‘perceived with certainty’ all render 
mutayaqqan/certificata. 

[164] 2. ‘ the percipient’: al-hass/ sentiens. See comment (b) to Bk. II. 

[166] x. ‘diameter’. See [144], note 4. 

[167] 1. ‘the alteration’ (fa-yataghayyar/mutabitur ), that is, the illumination 
and coloration of the eye produced by the light and colour of the object. See, 
e.g., I, 6(66-67]; II, 3[47]. 

[169] 1. See [160], note 1. 

[169] 2. ■ the two rays issuing from the eye’ — a rare example of lapsing into 
a terminology which I. H. had abandoned. For another example, see III, 7(79]. 


97 


II. 3 [200-231] 

[169] 3 ‘ the angle . . . may be smaller’: . . . qad takunu a$ghar/erit minor. The 
Arabic is precisely phrased: the angle in question will be smaller (than in the 
case of a frontally oriented surface) only for certain inclinations of the surface 
and for certain positions on it of the interval subtending the angle. 

[170] i.‘ bodies’. E, as in A 2 and R, has ‘body’ in the singular ( alfism / 
corpus). 

[171] 1- See III, 7(24-25] and related notes. 

[200-231] Perception of beauty: a theory of visual aesthetics. In an article ‘On 
Art and Aesthetics in Graeco-Arabic Wisdom Literature’, Franz Rosenthal 
speaks of the ‘fateful process which began in Greece with the pre-Socratic 
philosophers and continued relentlessly to the last days of Hellenistic Neo- 
Pythagoreanism and Neo-Platonism’, and which ‘had been leading to the 
almost exclusive equation of beautiful with, on the one hand, “useful”, and, 
on the other, “inner beauty”, that is, good, ethically or spiritually’ (p. 11). 
The case for moral and spiritual, as opposed to sensuous, beauty was 
authoritatively argued towards the end of the eleventh century by Abu Hamid 
al-Ghazali in his Ihya 3 'ulum ai-dln , Rub' iv, kitab 6 , ed. cit. in Bibl., vol. iv, 
pp. 371-73; see Ettinghausen, ‘Al-Ghazall on Beauty’. The reader will see that 
the twenty-seven hundred or so words which I. H. has devoted to the subject 
of beauty constitute a striking exception to a trend which appears to have 
generally maintained itself in the philosophic literature of the Islamic world. 
For although I. H.’s word for beauty, al-husn y like the Greek to kalon, may 
elsewhere refer to moral, practical or spiritual virtues, as well as to percep- 
tually pleasing forms, the whole discussion in these paragraphs is conducted in 
purely aesthetic terms. This may not be surprising as part of a theory of visual 
perception, but I. H.’s treatment of the subject is none the less remarkable for 
its consistent approach. It is also by far the longest discussion of visual beauty 
in Arabic from an exclusively aesthetic point of view (exception made of some 
of the many writings on Arabic calligraphy). It is known to have made an 
impression on European readers of the Optics , one of whom was the Renais- 
sance artist Lorenzo Ghiberti, who copied parts of these paragraphs in his 
Commentarii from a fourteenth-century Italian translation of the book (see 
Narducci, ‘Intorno ad una traduzione italiana . . .’; Vescovini, ‘Con- 
tribute . . .’; above, Introduction, sec. V). 

It is worth noting that I. H.’s preferred word for ‘beautiful’ is not the usual 
hasan (which he uses only twice), but the passive mustahsan, which emphasizes 
the subjective aspect of the aesthetic judgement. I. H.’s theory is primarily a 
theory of how we come to qualify an object as beautiful. Hence the ‘pervasive 
relativism’ which Erwin Panofsky found remarkable in I. H. ’s approach (‘The 
History of the Theory of human Proportions’, pp. 89-90, n. 63): the same 
object looks different in different situations, and a sense of the beautiful is 


Commentary 


99 


98 

induced in us by a given property (colour, shape, etc.) only in certain forms 
and in certain situations ([204, 222]). The Latin invariably has pulcher, which 
is closer to hasan than to mustahsan ; I have sought to retain the emphasis in the 
Arabic by using expressions like ‘to look beautiful’, or ‘to be found’, 
‘considered’ or ‘felt to be beautiful’. Paragraph [200] makes the general 
opening statement that a ‘kind of beauty’ may be perceived in each of the 
particular visible properties by itself, whilst other ‘kinds of beauty’ may be 
produced ( faala/jacere , a verb repeatedly used as the counterpart of the passive 
mustahsan) by some of these properties in conjunction ( iqtiran/coniugatio ) with 
one another. Then, in the following paragraph, I. H. distinguishes four causes 
(sing. C illa/causa) of visual beauty: (1) A single property (such as colour by 
itself or shape by itself); in this case, an object looks beautiful because it 
possesses that particular beautiful-looking property. (2) The (additive) effect 
of several properties acting individually on the perceiver; that is, an object is 
judged to be beautiful because it has two or more properties each of which 
looks beautiful independently of the others. (3) The conjunction or combina- 
tion ( iqtiran/ coniunctio ), as such , of a number of properties, as distinguished 
from the cumulative effect of ‘the properties themselves’. As example we may 
take I. H.’s remarks, in [220], about the similarity of paired members of an 
animal’s body as a condition of their beauty. Finally, (4) the ‘harmony’ 

(, ta’alluf/ compositio ) that may be produced by the composed ( murakkaba / 
compositae ) properties. 

In general, I. H. explains (1) in [202-222], and (3) in [223-225]; he discusses 
(4), in terms of ‘proportionality and harmony’ (al-tanasub wa al-i’tilaf ), in 
[226-227]; and devotes [228-230] to proportionality as a cause of beauty in its 
own right. He does not offer a detailed explanation of (2), presumably because 
such an explanation would be largely a repetition of what we already know 
from (1). 

The reader should be aware of how these terms are rendered in the present 
translation and in the Latin version. Iqtiran , though indicating at times a kind 
of combination endowed with harmony or proportionality (e.g. in [230]), in 
general denotes the co-existence in an object of a number of properties or 
features; I have translated this word as ‘conjunction’; the Latin has coniugatio 
and coniunctio. I. H.’s words for ‘proportionality’ and ‘proportioned’ do not 
raise problems for the English or Latin translation. But problems arise in 
connection with his use of three cognate terms: ta’lif ta’alluf and i’tilaf They 
derive from the same root (’If) and have the general sense of union, 
combination, composition, concord, harmony. From the ninth century, ta’ltf 
and ta’lifi had become the chosen equivalents of the Greek harmonia and 
harmonikos , respectively; and by I. H.’s time the passive mu’allaf and the verbal 
noun ta’/ffwere in current scientific use in expressions like al-nisba al-mu’allafa , 


II. 3 [200-231] 

harmonic ratio, and 'ilm ta’ltf al-luhun (or al-alhdn), the science of the composi- 
tion of melodies (ta harmonika , music) (see al-Farabl, lh$a\ p. 88; al- 
Khwarizmi, Mafitih , p. 236; Afnan, Lexicon , p. 9). Examination of the pas- 
sages in which the above three terms occur has led me to translate ta’alluf 
([202]) and i’tilaf([226, 230]) as ‘harmony’, while rendering ta’lif ([20$, 223, 
228]) as ‘composition’. Muta’alliffa) seems to be used in the sense of ‘com- 
posed’ in [226, 231] and in the sense of ‘harmonious’ in [226]. The use of 
‘harmony’ and ‘harmonious’ is suggested, in fact demanded, by I. H.’s 
repeated joining of i’tilaf or muta’allif with ‘proportion’ ([226, 230]). Indeed, 
the context would seem to require us to understand ta’ltf even when rendered 
as ‘composition’, to mean ‘harmonious composition’. The Latin translates 
ta’alluf in [202] as composition thus not distinguishing between two different 
Arabic words in the same sentence (see above), but the translator later chose 
consonoritas and consonantia for i’tilaf as it occurs in [226] and [230] — see notes 
below. Ta’ltf is rendered by compositio. 

The idea of proportion as the feature most responsible for the beauty of an 
object is, of course, of Greek provenance, though the full history of its 
transmission and development up to I. H.’s time has yet to be written. The 
ninth-century prose writer al-Jahiz gives an early expression to this idea, using 
a different vocabulary from that we find in I. H. In an interesting short passage 
in his Risalat al-Qiyan, al-Jahiz offers to explain beauty, as a quality of the 
human body, in terms of what he calls tamam (fullness), \ tidal (moderateness) 
and wazn (measure, balance, rhythm). He tells us that by tamam he does not 
mean a magnitude ‘exceeding moderate measure’ ( tajdwuz miqddr al-i' tidal), as 
the excessive height of a human figure. Such excess would reduce rather than 
enhance the beauty of the figure. In accordance with the general trend noted 
above, he first affirms that everything, even in the realms of wisdom and 
piety, has a limit in excess of which the thing becomes unbeautiful and 
blameworthy; and this, he asserts, is true of both body and soul. As applied to 
the human body, however, wazn , although akin to i'tidal , seems to denote 
something like commensurability: it is lacking when some members dispro- 
portionately exceed the others (his word is yajut) — as when wide eyes go with 
a small and snub nose, or a great nose with narrow eyes, or a short chin with a 
huge head, or a long back with short thighs, or when the width of the forehead 
exceeds the length of the lower part of the face. Wazn , says al-Jahi?, is also a 
quality that can be found in vessels, various kinds of furnishing, embroidered 
fabric, clothes and ‘the wazn of canals in which water flows’; ‘by wazn , he 
finally adds, ‘we mean the right shape and composition in a thing’ (al-istiwa ft 
al-khart wa al-tarklb) (pp. 162-63). 

In the tenth century the concept of proportion, expressed in terms of 
tandsub , consciously entered the art of calligraphy, or at least discussions of it. 


14 


100 


Commentary 


ioi 


To the famous vizier-calligrapher Ibn Muqla (d. c. a.d. 940) is attributed the 
‘invention of a special kind of writing, the “proportioned script” ( al-khatt 
al-mansub)\ later to be developed by another famous and influential calligra- 
pher, Ibn al-Bawwab who died, probably, in a.d. 1022 (D. Sourdel in El 2 , hi, 
p. 887A). 

Later in the century of Ibn Muqla, the Sincere Brethren devoted one of their 
anonymous Epistles (no. 1 in the propaedeutic group) to ‘the most valued 
science’ of ratio and proportion ‘ for the use of the philosophically minded, and 
not for the accountants in the administrative offices of the government’ 
(. Rasa’il , 1, pp. 242-45). But the ‘philosophically minded’ ( al-mutafalsijun ) were 
not necessarily philosophical scholars and, as everywhere in their writings, 
the Brethren were aiming their teaching at the class of craftsmen and generally 
educated people. Having distinguished the various kinds of ratio — arithme- 
tical, geometrical and harmonic — they went on to argue that geometry was at 
the basis of every art, that no art could achieve the perfection of which it was 
capable without drawing upon the science of ratios. In the end they produced 
what has been called a ‘harmonistic cosmology’ which encompassed every 
aspect of the universe, and which they supported by examples from the arts of 
medicine, astrology, talismans, as well as music (see especially Epistle no. 5 in 
the same group — ibid., pp. 183-241). Significantly, they also included 
writing and painting: a script was beautiful only when the variously shaped 
letters were proportionately executed as regards size and order; and to 
produce pleasing pictures, painters were obliged to observe the right pro- 
portions of colours and of the shapes and sizes of figures (ibid., pp. 252-53). 
Their lengthy discussion of proportionality in writing (ibid., pp. 219-22) 
became one of the sources for later writers on the subject (see, e.£.,al- 
Qalqashandl, d. 821/1418, $ubh al-a'shd , in, pp. 41-45). 

In light of the developments illustrated above it is not surprising that 
proportionality should occupy a prominent place in I. H. ’s aesthetic theory. It 
may be that ‘ Alhazen does not look upon proportionality as “the” fundamen- 
tal principle of beauty’, as Panofsky has remarked; on the other hand, it would 
certainly not be true to say, as Panofsky has also said, that ‘he mentions it, as 
one might say, en passant ’ (loc. cit.). I. H. does not only set proportionality 
apart from other ‘causes’ of beauty ([226]); he assigns to it a special place of 
importance as the one cause that is capable of raising the beauty of an object to 
a level of ‘perfection’ ([228, 230]); and he goes as far as to argue that 
proportionality ‘alone’ may produce beauty ([208]). I have counted, in 
paragraphs [205, 226-232], no fewer than thirty-one occurrences of the 
concept of proportionality, all expressed by the cognates: tanasub , munasaba, 
mutanasib, munasib and yunasib. The Latin translation reflects this unmistakable 
emphasis fairly faithfully. 


II. 3 [221] 

Two other words used by I. H. are intizam and tartib/ordinatio, here trans- 
lated as ‘regularity’ and ‘order’ ([204-205, 224, 227, 229]). Intizam could also 
mean something like rhythm, and the expression tartxb muntazim in [224] 
reminds one of the Greek eurhythmia or rhythmic order (referred to by 
Vitruvius in De architectural 1, ii, ed. cit., 1, p. 29; Panofsky, ‘The History of the 
Theory of human Proportions...’, op. cit. , pp. 68-69, n. 19); the same 
expression might be related to al-Jahi?’s wazn: the metric ordering of words in 
versification was commonly called nazm and wazn. 

[200] 1. ‘one of the kinds of beauty’. Reading: naw'an min anwa al-husn, 
with A 2 . E omits anwa. 

[203] 1. On these colour names see comment (a) to Bk 1 , ch. 4; and note on 
I, 6[i 14]. 

[213] i .‘ gravity and staidness’: al-waqdr wa al-samt/gravitas et taciturnitas. 
The Latin translator read al-samt. On the meaning of al-samt as used here see 
Lane’s Arabic-English Lexicon , under Samt, senses I and 5. 

[218] 1. ‘the species called abu qalamun . Ptolemy cites the changing colours 
of the chameleon (‘ animal quod uocatur chameleon) when the light shining upon 
it is unchanged as evidence for the objectivity of colour (Ptol. Opt., 11, 1 5). The 
passages in Ptolemy and I. H. are further confirmation of S. de Sacy’s identifi- 
cation of abu qalamun (in Jabir’s alchemy) with the Greek chamaileon (see 
Kraus, Jabir ibn playyan, 11, pp. 109-10, n. 4). The OED describes the chame- 
leon as ‘A saurian reptile of the genus Chamaeleo . . . distinguished by a 
prehensile tail, long tongue, eyes moving independently . . . but especially by 
[the] power of changing the colour of the skin, “varying through different 
shades of yellow, red, gray, brown, and dull inky blue”.’ Abu qalamun also 
occurs in the Optics as the name of a certain cloth; see I, 4(25]. 

[218] 2. ‘ the rainbow colours . . . in subdued lights’. Kamal al-Din notes the 
‘apparent’ contradiction between what is asserted here and in I, 3[i32]: 
‘When . . . these animals are in obscure or faintly illuminated places, these 
irises cease to be visible in them, and their original colours become apparent’ 
( Tanqxh , 1, p. 221). 

[220] 1. ‘black . . . blue’: kahlaVniger . . . zarqa /viridis. 

[221] 1. ‘deep curves’: al-ta'r\qdt. The Latin translation omits wa awakhir 
al-ta'nqat. The singular ta'rxq refers to the sublinear curve which certain letters 
of the alphabet, such as nun, sin, sad, yd\ assume when they occur by 
themselves or at the end of a word (see Rosenthal, ‘Abu Hayyan al-Tawhidl 
on Penmanship’, Ars Islamica, 13— I4[i948], p. 22; idem. Four Essays, p. 27 and 
n. 3; al-Qalqashandi, $ubh al-a'sha, ill, p. 42; Mxzdn al-khatt c ala wad e ustadh 
al-salaf, MS Muallim Cevdet Library [Istanbul], microfilm Uppsala Univer- 
sity Library, Ritter Collection, no. 15:4108, fol. 15b). In theoretical accounts 
of the ‘proportioned script’ the shape is described as approaching that of a 


102 


Commentary 


103 


semicircle with the length of the letter alif as diameter. The length of the alif 
itself is taken to be eight times the thickness of the dot produced by the pen in 
use (see, e.g ., Ikhwan al-$afa\ Rasail , 1, pp. 220-21). 

[221] 2. ‘and joints’. Reading wa ta'liqatihd as (apparently) in A 2 and in M 
and S. But the word, which is ignored in the Latin translation, may well be 
ta'riqdtihd , deep curves; see [221], note 1. 

[223] 1. ‘and are in beautiful composition with one another’: wa ta'lxfu 
ba'diha bi-ba'din ta’lTfan mustahsanan/et compositio illarum inter se est compositio 
pulchra. 

[223] 2. ‘conjunction’: iqtirdn/coniugatio. 

[226] 1. ‘ proportionality and harmony’: al-tanasub wa al-i'tilaf/ proportion - 
alitas et consonoritas. 

[22 6] 2. ‘ composed’: al-murakkaba al-muta’allifa/ comp 0 sitae. 

[226] 3. ‘without these properties being all proportionate and harmonious’: 
wa laysa jamVuha yakunu mutanasiban wa muta' alii fan /tamen omnes non sunt 
proportionales. 

[230] 1. ‘the result of the proportionality and harmony obtaining between 
the conjoined properties’: li-tanasubi ma yahsulu ft-ma bayna tilka al-ma r dni 
al-muqtarina wa i’tildfiha/propter proportionalitatem illarum intentionum coniuncta- 
rum inter se. 

[230] 2. ‘due to the proportion which brings harmony to the two or more 
properties combined in the form’: wa huwa li-tanasubin yuallijii bayna al- 
ma'nayayn aw al-ma'am al-mujtami'a fx al-sura/Et hoc est propter proportionalitatem 
quae contingit inter illas intentiones. 

[230] 3. ‘due only to the proportionality and harmony’: inna-ma huwa min 
al-tanasub wa al-xtilaf/nisi ex proportionalitate et consonantia. 

[235] 1. ‘by analogy and inferences’: bi-al-qiyas wa al-istidlalat/per argumenta- 
tionem et significationem . 


chapter 4 

In the account given in this chapter of vision as a percipient-object relation- 
ship, I. H. adopts an objectivist way of speaking which dispenses with all 
reference to subjective images in the eye or in the common nerve. According 
to this manner of speaking visual perception is perception of ‘forms’ under- 
stood as ‘composed of’ a multitude of particular visible properties possessed 
by material objects, and perception of this compound form is considered to 
take place in advance of perceiving the constituent properties in the form. As 
I. H. puts it at the end of paragraph [1]: ‘. . . upon glancing at a visible object, 
sight perceives every one of the particular properties in conjunction with the 


II. 4 

others; then by distinguishing the properties in the form, it perceives each of 
them separately.’ I. H. is concerned here with the conscious effort that may 
follow upon the unconscious operations performed on the sensory images 
after these have occurred in the common nerve — operations which, in his 
view, lead to perception of each of the specified particular properties as 
explained in detail in Bk II, Chapter 3. It is only through such a conscious 
effort that we can make certain of ‘the true’ form of a physical object by 
deliberately identifying each and every one of the object’s visible features. He 
employs ta 3 ammul/intuitio (contemplation) and tafaqqud! consider atio (scrutiny) 
for this operation, and calls tahaqquq/ certificate the process of verification 
without which one cannot be sure of having obtained a veridical perception 
( [2—4] ) . Ta *ammul and the resulting tahaqquq are achieved both by the organ of 
sight, which is naturally disposed to ‘pass the ray’s axis’ over all parts of the 
object so as to acquire a clear and distinct impression of every one of them (see 
[9], note 1), and simultaneously by the faculty of discrimination or dis- 
cernment ([8]; cf. [10-11]). It is to be noted that, in accordance with the 
general approach of this chapter, amara/signum is treated as an objective 
feature, not as a quality of the sensory image ([20-23]; c f opening comment 
to Chapter 3). 

There are two chief modes of vision, each of which may or may not be 
accompanied by previously acquired knowledge (ma'rifa/cognitio or e ilm/ 
scientia ) of the object seen. (I) Glancing vision (ibsar bi-al-badiha/visio in prim 0 
aspectu) yields perception of the manifest features of the object only. When it is 
not accompanied by recognition or followed by contemplation, glancing 
vision is called ib$ar bi-mujarrad al-badiha/visio per (solam) phantasiam (la). Ibsar 
bi-al-badxha ma e a taqaddum al-ma'rifa/visio secundum phantasiam cum cognitione 
praecedente (lb) is recognition of an object previously known to the percipient, 
but without contemplating the object at the moment of vision. Whether or 
not it involves previous knowledge, glancing vision does not reveal what the 
object truly is (haqiqat al-mubsar/ veritas rei visae ), nor can it serve as a means of 
verifying the object ([5]). 

Vision by mere contemplation, bi-mujarrad al-ta'ammul/sola intuitione (Ila), is 
contemplating an object not previously seen or not currently remembered 
([18]). And, finally, vision accompanied by previous knowledge (ma'a 
taqaddum al-ma c rifa/cum cognitione praecedente (lib) is vision of objects that have 
been seen previously and are now remembered and therefore recognized, in 
addition to being inspected ([19]). Objects of this last mode of perception are 
either familiar objects which are quickly recognized after a brief and incom- 
plete inspection, or it comes after the surveying (istiqra’ / consideratio) of ‘all’ 
visible properties of the object and thus requires a certain duration of time that 
varies with the number of these properties and with their degree of subtlety. 


104 


Commentary 


io$ 


L H. ends his summary of the contents of this chapter ([33-35]) by saying 
that ‘fully verified’ vision of an object is possible only after a complete survey of 
the object’s visible features has been made ([35]). Understood in an episte- 
mological sense his statement might be puzzling. Are these features not 
indefinite in number? Do they not take on different appearances in different 
situations, such as intensity of illumination, surrounding objects, distance 
from the observer, position and orientation of the object under examination, 
and so on, as I. H. himself has repeatedly pointed out? When does one decide 
that a survey of ‘all properties’ of even a single object has been completed, and 
under what conditions, and for what purpose? But these would be the wrong 
questions to ask. I. H. goes on in the same passage to say in fact that the 
‘verification’ he intends here is a relative concept, being dependent on the 
power of sight which is subject to variation of strength and weakness. 
Speaking as a psychologist he merely intends a process that yields clearer, 
more detailed and more distinct perceptions — all these being qualities that 
can be defined operationally for experimental purposes without encountering 
epistemological difficulties. 

A similar problem of interpretation arises in connection with I. H.’s 
conception of a ‘moderate range’ for perceiving a given object as that range 
within which no ‘sensible discrepancy’ exists between the perceived form and 
‘the true’ or ‘real’ form of the object (see III, 3 [1 5]; also III, 3 [3 3], on the 
concept of seeing an object as it is). But here again the word ‘sensible’ betrays 
the psychological (as distinguished from the epistemological) status of his 
concept. In my view the concerns of Books II and III of I. H.’s Optics are the 
concerns of a psychologist, not of an epistemologist. These two Books 
illustrate a research agenda based on the assumption that veridical vision is 
normal vision — an assumption which, it has been argued, also underlies 
Aristotle’s study of sense perception (see Irving Block, ‘Truth and Error in 
Aristotle’s Theory of Sense Perception’). Unlike Aristotle’s predominantly 
philosophical treatment of the subject in De anima, however, I. H. ’s investiga- 
tions here must be regarded solely as an essay in scientific psychology. 

[1] 1. ‘a multitude of the particular properties [which are then distin- 

guished] in the imagination and the faculty of judgement’: 'iddatan min 
al-ma'ani al-juz'iyya munfaridan [sic] fi al-takhayyul wa al-tamyiz. The Arabic 

cannot be quite right. The English translation makes use of the Latin: multae 

intentiones particular es quae distinguuntur in imaginatione . 

[5] 1. ‘If it contemplates it and inspects all its parts’: fa-in ta'ammalahu wa 
istaqma jamVa ajzaih/deinde sipraeter illud inspexerit ipsam et consider averit omnes 
partes eius. Here ta’ammala and istaqra’a mean practically the same thing; see 
note on I, 1 [6], especially under istiqra I inductio . 


II. 4 [31] 

[6] 1 . The reference is to Chapter 2 in Book II. 

[ 9 ] i • ‘ the ray’s axis’: sahm al-shua /axis radialis. The Arabic expression, like 
the frequently used expression khutut al-shu'a c (lines of the ray), betrays the 
meaning of ‘ray’ as the totality of the visual cone; see note on I, 1(4]. On the 
role of the axial ray, which first appears in Ptolemy and Galen and is later used 
by Damianus of Larissa, and on Euclid’s conception of eye movement as a 
means of surveying the visible object, see Lejeune, Euclide et Ptolemee , 
PP* 35-37; see also Alkindi De aspectibus, Props. 9, 11 and 12. 

[12] 1. ‘ take shape in the imagination’: mutashakkilan fi al-takhayyul /figurata 
in imaginatione . 

an appearance and a shape’: hay'atan wa shaklan /formam et figuram. 
Compare the use of hay ’a in [19]. 

[ 19 ] 1. ‘ total appearance’: jumlat hay’atih/totam formam eius. See [16], note I. 

[21] 1. l * * * 5 abjad\ a word denoting the Arabic alphabet; see II, $[23]. 

[ 25 ] i.‘ mint’: al-nammam. The Arabic word (ignored in the Latin trans- 
lation) may designate any one of several labiate plants, including the various 
kinds of mint. See Meyerhof (ed.), Sarh asma al-'uqqar, p. 125. 

[28] i.‘ the perceiver’: al-hass/sentiens. See comment (b) to Bk II. 

[31] 1. ‘designs and decorations’: tiuqush wa tazayin/picturae et sculpturae . 
See I, 2(22], note 1. 


Ill 


107 


BOOK III 

So far as the theory of direct or rectilinear vision is concerned I.H.’s 
fundamentally new ideas are mostly contained in the first two Books of the 
Optics. The third Book is largely an exercise in the extension and application of 
these ideas. This does not mean that Book III is lacking in interest; no earlier 
treatment of the subject of visual perception comes even close to this Book in 
richness and variety of observation. But the applications often seem some- 
what mechanical or only a little inspired; and they frequently serve to illustrate 
obvious remarks, rather than explore new ground. There can be no doubt, 
however, about the importance of Book III for the history of the psychology 
of vision, if only because of the large amount of material it contains and the 
experimental and, apparently, original concepts around which this material 
has been organized. 

As a theme in the history of philosophy, the fallibility of sense-perception as 
a source of knowledge can be traced back to the Presocratics. The unreliability 
of the senses was emphasized, for example, by Heraclitus, Parmenides and 
Democritus. Plato excluded objects of sense from the class of true objects of 
knowledge. And, for Aristotle, scientific knowledge was possible only in so 
far as it concerned the universal and intelligible, as opposed to the particular 
and sensible. The commonly known errors of sense-perception tended to 
figure prominently in epistemological discussions, especially in the writings 
of the Greek sceptics who exploited them to the full (cf A. A. Long, Hellenistic 
Philosophy , esp. Ch. 3). And it fell to writers on optics to provide a scientific 
explanation of the errors of vision. In Euclid’s Optics the explanation always 
took a geometrical form, as when the apparent variation of a visible magni- 
tude was correlated with variation of the angle of vision. Psychological 
considerations began to creep into Ptolemaic explanations; and in the Optics of 
I. H. a systematic psychological account of the errors of rectilinear vision 
alone totally occupies the largest of the seven Books that make up the entire 
work. 

The ancient philosophical theme was bound to recur in the writings of 
Islamic philosophers who, in fact, reflected in various ways many of the 
attitudes exhibited by their Greek predecessors. But it was in the dialectical 
discussions of the Islamic ‘theologians’ (the mutakallimun or practitioners of 
kalam ), which began to develop before the translation of Greek philosophical 
works got under way, that the reliability of the senses became an urgent and 
abiding subject of debate. And in these discussions, too, visual illusions were 
prominent. Kalam postulated the possibility ofkno wledge and was accordingly 


committed to rebut the arguments of the sceptics whom the mutakallimun 
usually referred to as ‘the sophists’ (al-sufistd’iyya). The Mu'tazilites, the 
earliest powerful group of mutakallimun, in fact held that knowledge {'ilm), not 
mere adherence to traditional belief ( taqlid ), was the mark of the true believer, 
and they urged Muslims to replace taqlid by 'ilm, which was to be achieved 
through a process of rational reasoning (na?ar). The characteristic sign of " ilm 
or true knowledge was a state of mind which they called sukun al-nafs , a state of 
self-conscious certitude. Veridical sense-perception ( idrak ) was one of the 
ways to knowledge — they described it as daruri or necessary in the sense ot 
‘indispensable’ — and it was self-certifying, being accompanied by that state 
of mental repose or certitude which distinguishes all genuine knowledge. 
(The reader will perhaps recognize echoes of Stoic doctrines.) 

To maintain this position against the arguments of the Sceptics/Sophists, 
the Mu'tazilites and the mutakallimun in general had to provide an explanation 
of all kinds of perceptual errors. So far as visual errors are concerned, the 
explanation was presented in terms of the visual-ray hypothesis which kalam 
generally adopted. In the following paragraphs I shall paraphrase the explana- 
tions expounded in the summa of Mu'tazilite kalam , Kitab al-Mughni , written in 
the late fourth/ tenth or early fifth/ eleventh century by al-Qadl * Abd al-Jabbar 
(d. 415/1025). They are found in volume iv of this enormous work {Rufat 
al-Bari = ‘On Seeing God’), and occupy the entire chapter entitled ‘That the 
beholder of a thing must be deemed as knowing it provided that doubt has 
been removed’ (pp. 70-79, see Bibl.). The chapter includes the longest list, as 
well as the most elaborate account, of visual illusions in any Arabic source 
known to me up to I. H. ’s date. Not only does this chapter give us some idea 
of what was known and discussed with regard to visual illusions just before 
I. H.’s time in the kalam literature with which he was undoubtedly familiar; it 
also illustrates an approach quite distinct from what we find in Kitab al- 
Manazir , though it tries to make use of current optical views. 

The account in "Abd al-Jabbar’s al-Mughni presupposes a version of the 
visual-ray theory which can be described as ‘Platonic’: a ray of sight ( shu'a e 
al-ayn or shu'a e al-basar) issues forth ( infa$ala ) from the eye but does not go all 
the way to the object seen; vision occurs when the ray, having extended for a 
certain distance, joins a moderately strong ray of light in line with it; and we fail 
to achieve vision when the light ray is too weak, too strong or totally absent, 
or when the combined ray is blocked. "Abd al-Jabbar makes it clear that he is 
reporting views held and discussed in the fourth/ tenth-century by ‘masters’ of 
Mu"tazilite kalam: Abu 'Abd Allah al-Ba$ri (d. 367/977-78), Abu "All ibn 
Khallad (edition: J[a]llad; died in the middle of the fourth/ tenth century — see 
Sezgin, GAS , 1, p. 624, no. 17) and Abu Hashim al-Jubba’i (d. 321/933), and 
he cites in particular a book by Abu Hashim ‘On Illusion’ (al-Iham). No work 




Commentary 


109 


108 

by any of these scholars is known to have survived. In the paraphrase that 
follows I have numbered the reported observations for ease of reference. 

1 . A grape in a filled cup looks larger than it is. 

This is because the grape is seen together with particles or atoms ( ajza ’) of the 
surrounding liquid as a single, large body. The illusion is due to the inability of sight 
to distinguish between the grape and (some) parts of the liquid, in the same way as 
sight confuses the particles of a colouring material, such as saffron, with the water 
into which they have been dispersed. 

2. The moon appears double when the corner of one eye is pressed. 

Reason: Pressing one eye causes the ray that issues from it to deviate from the 
direction ( jiha ) of the ray issuing from the other eye. For the same reason, the 
‘second’ (i.e. imaginary) moon also appears to move with the movement of the 
eyelid when pressed. The imaginary moon disappears when the ray from the 
pressed eye is blocked. A weakening in the pressed eye may also cause an object to 
appear farther than it is, thus giving rise to two moons, one closer than the other. 
Truly perceived is the moon seen by the unpressed eye. 

3. The rising moon may be seen in water and in the sky , although only one moon exists. 

Reason: A moon is ‘imagined’ ( takhayyala ) to be in the water only because the 

water surface has reflected ( e akasa) the ray to the moon in the sky; the latter is the 
only one (truly) perceived. 

4. Looking at ourselves in a mirror, our face appears to be in a place where it is not. 

Reason: As in (3), reflection (in'ikas) is responsible for what we imagine to be 

seeing. In this case, however, the mirror acts as if it were the observer’s eye, and 
what faces it appears to be facing the observer. 

5. Looking at ourselves in water, we appear to be inverted. 

Reflection is again said to be the cause, but in a way that I find incomprehensible. 
The text seems to be saying that we see through rays reflected to our higher parts 
before we achieve vision by means of those rays reflected to our lower parts! 

6. The mirage phenomenon. 

Explanation: when the ray strikes a flat and glittering ( lama e dn ) surface, it 
wriggles and vibrates ( idtaraba wa taraddada), thereby conveying the imaginary 
impression of a wavy water surface, given also that the ray has the colour of water. 

7. The bent (munkasir) appearance of poles half immersed in water. 

This is because the ray strikes parts of the undulating water one after another. The 
‘explanation’ seems to be related to the one given in (5). There is no reference to 
optical refraction, i.e. the bending of rays at the water surface. 


Ill 

8. A body may be visible from a distance, but not its colour. 

Abu Hashim (al-Jubba’l), maintaining that the substratum ( mahall) of colour 

cannot be seen without the colour inhering in it, and that seeing one must imply 
seeing the other, attributed the phenomenon to the existence of some external 
obstruction, such as dust or fog. Other Mu'tazill masters differed, among them 
Abu 'All ibn Khallad (see above). 

9. Both the body and the colour may be visible, but without the colour being distinguishable 
from other colours. 

Abu Hashim’s view, outlined in (8), is the answer: dust or vapour rising up from 
the ground’s surface and intervening between us and the object is the reason. The 
author then goes on to apply the same explanation to the well-known ancient 
puzzle: why the sun appears larger at the horizon than at higher altitudes. Size is not 
specifically mentioned here, but it seems to have been partly intended, at least as an 
afterthought, since it is mentioned explicitly later [see (13)] where the reader is 
referred back to what is being offered here — namely: that the sun, as it ascends in 
the sky, moves away from the terrestrial vapours which diminish its luminosity 
when they gather in front of it. The sun appears to increase in luminosity when it 
has risen higher in the sky, because of the absence, in that position, of vapour in line 
with it. 

As stated in the text, this is only an explanation of why luminosity varies with 
position. To be complete as an explanation of variable size other premisses must be 
added. It would seem that the author was trying to enlist the help of an explanation 
(perhaps a current one) in terms of aerial perspective. But whether he, or one of his 
sources, was in fact aware of such an explanation is not certain. 

10. Looking from a ship in motion, objects close to the edge of the river-bank appear to 
move in the direction opposite to that of the sailing ship, while objects farther away seem to 
move with the ship, or appear to be stationary when the nearer objects are not observed. 

Reason: The ray of sight, having struck the objects on the river-bank one after 
another, say from right to left, is reflected back to the eye in the same order; hence 
the apparent motion attributed to the objects from left to right. The farther objects 
appear to move in the opposite direction (that is, with the ship) because the ray is 
reflected back from them after it has been reflected from the nearer ones. No such 
motion of the farther objects is imagined when the closer objects are not simultan- 
eously perceived, because the ray does not appear to fall on the farther objects after 
it strikes what is taken to be moving in the opposite direction of the ship’s motion. 

11. A star seen behind a cloud appears to share the motion of the observer, but not in the 
absence of the cloud . 

The explanation is the same as that of observation (10). 

12. Similarly, the moon seems to move towards the cloud when the observer is moving in 
the opposite direction. 

The explanation given is not clear to me. 


iio Commentary 

i 3 . The disc of the sun appears larger at rising and setting than when it is higher up in the 
sky. 

See (9). 

14. A flame appears larger from a greater distance. 

Reason: Having been weakened by travelling over the great distance, sight is 
unable to distinguish the flame from the surrounding matter ( e.g . vapour or dust). 
See explanation to observation (1). 

1 5. In fog, a body looks larger than it really is. 

Reason: As in (14). 

16. A body looks smaller than it is from a distance. 

The reason (as in Euclid) is that the angle of vision ( zdwiyat al-shu'd*) becomes 
smaller. But the explanation of how this happens is distinctive. Appealing to the 
concept of i e timad (effort, endeavour, pressure), which was basic to Mu'tazilite 
speculations about motion (the concept has some affinity with the idea of conatus in 
seventeenth-century mechanics), we are told that when the object is very far off the 
beholder narrows the angle by constraining the visual cone further (i'tamada al-ra\ 
zdwiyat al-shu'd' fadla Ctimddin [edition: fasla i'timadin]), thereby causing the object 
to look smaller. The analogy is drawn with someone who is preparing to jump over 
a certain distance: the degree of his straining to jump will depend on the magnitude 
of the distance. Sight will cease to see an object from an exceedingly great distance 
because it is incapable of exerting the compression required by that distance, and the 
ray ceases in this case to act as an instrument of vision just as it does in the dark when 
the absence of external light causes it to be dissipated. 

17. A small object, like a finger ring, looks as large as a bracelet when placed very close to 
the eye. 

Reason: The visual angle is relaxed (and widened) as the object gets closer to the 
eye. 

18. Our face looks longer or broader, larger or smaller, according to the (shape and 
orientation of the) polished body in which we see it; an example of such a body is a sword held 
vertically then horizontally before the face. 

The imagined distortion is a property of the ray wrongly attributed to the face. 

19. A point of light (e.g. a live coal) looks like a circle when attached to the circumference 
of a fast-turning disk ( duwwdma , Pmillstone). 

Reason: The ray is felt as if it were moving with the disk, when the motion of the 
latter is very rapid. 

20. The stars, invisible in daylight, can be seen from the bottom of a deep well. 

Reason: In daylight the (strong) solar ray has the effect of dispersing the visual ray 

and preventing it from proceeding in the manner proper for an instrument of seeing 


III. 1,2 nr 

objects like the stars. Being at the bottom of the well protects the visual ray from 
this solar effect, and the ray is allowed to proceed forward from the eye and join 
with the sun’s light and see the star. 

21 . Specks of dust, though real, become visible only in strong sunlight. 

Reason: Dust particles are too fine to be seen by the ray of sight alone. The visual 
ray derives strength from the solar ray by joining it (see reference to the ‘Platonic’ 
view described above). 

As arguments in the epistemological debate with ‘the sceptics’ the thrust of 
the preceding remarks is clear: our sense of sight is liable to make errors, but 
we are also able to correct them; visual errors do not, therefore, constitute 
valid grounds for supporting a sceptical position that denies man’s ability to 
distinguish between reality and illusion. But the explanations given illustrate a 
weakness that is noticeable in all attempts by the mutakallimun to account for 
‘natural’ phenomena in terms of their own doctrines, namely their lack of 
mathematical competence. It was this innocence of mathematics, I think, that 
lay at the basis of the difficulties they inevitably encountered in their poten- 
tially promising approach to the study of motion. I. H., by contrast, was first 
and foremost a mathematician who was contributing to what he consciously 
conceived as a ‘physico-mathematical’ project; and while his discussions of 
visual illusions may be said to have epistemological implications, his treat- 
ment of them is clearly the work of one who wrote as an experimental 
psychologist and not as an epistemologist. 

CHAPTER I 

The Chapter, a Preface (sadr) to Book III, simply states the aim of this Book, 
which is to enumerate and explain the kinds of error that occur in rectilinear 
vision. 

CHAPTER 2 

[1-10] As a first step in the explanation of binocular vision these paragraphs 
generally aim to establish that the two forms or images produced on the 
surfaces of the two eyes (and, hence, on the surfaces of the two crystalline 
humours) by a sufficiently small object that is ‘similarly situated’ with respect to 
both eyes and at a ‘moderate’ distance from them will be practically identically 
situated on these surfaces, and will retain the same configuration and orienta- 
tion of points as on the surface of the object. 

Figure C. III. 1 will make it easy to follow I. H.’s argument. 


II 2 


Commentary 


r 


ADM B 



Figure C. III. i 

AB = a line across the surface of the visible object, frontally oriented in the 
plane of the axes of vision. 

M = ‘meeting point’, i.e. the point at the middle of AB, where the visual axes 
ElM and E R M meet. 

D = ‘displaced point’, i.e. a point on AB , close to M. 

El > E r = centres of the left and right eyes. 

n = surface of the eye (i.e. of the cornea). 

h = surface of the crystalline humour, concentric with n. 

E l D and E R D y called ‘the displaced lines’, represent the rays through which D is 
regarded by the left and right eyes while these are focused on M. The two lines are 
similarly situated ‘in respect to direction’, i.e. they are both located on the same side 
of their respective axes, ElD being to the left of axis ElM, and E R D to the left of 
axis E R M. 

E l D and E R D are practically equal when DM is sufficiently small; they are exactly 
equal in some cases in which D lies above or below M — see [4], note 2. 


113 


HI- 2 [7] 

[4] 1 • 1 indirection’: ji al-jiha/in parte. See note to II, 3[94-i2o]. 

[4] 2. ‘ then they may be equal’: fa-qad yakundn mutasawiyayn/possunt 
aequales. I. H. ’s language is precisely correct; as Kamal al-DIn specifies in a 
comment, the displaced lines ( E L D y E R D in Fig. C. III. 1) will be equal only 
when the ‘displaced point’ D lies above or below M, in such a way that the 
perpendicular from D to the plane of the axes passes either through M or 
through a point (before or beyond M) on the bisector of the angle ElME r 
( Tanqxh , 1, p. 245). 

[7] 1. ‘the form of the remaining parts’: surat al-ajza al-baqiya , as in E and 
Ay R: formae partium residuarum. The singular ‘form’ is justified in light of the 
next sentence, where the form of the remaining parts plus the form of the 
middle part are counted as two . 



Figure C. III. 2 


Commentary 


114 

[81 1 ‘ And since not all of the [distant object’s] parts are similarly situated’: 
wa laysa jamt' ajzd'ihima [sic] mutashabihat al-awda' 7 aut non omnes partes eorum 
sunt consimilis positionis . The dual ajzd’ihima implies that the parts meant are 
those of the two dissimilarly situated forms of the distant object. 

[9] This points out the case in which a visible object O' or O" 
(Fig. C. III. 2), placed between the axes before or beyond the object O on 



A L , A R = centres of the cranium apertures. 

C = middle of the ‘common nerve' or optic chiasma, called ‘the Centre’. 

M = middle of the line joining A L and A R . 

A l P, A r P , drawn through the centres of the eyes E L and E R = radial axes, 
converging at a point P on the surface of the visible object. 

CMP , perpendicular to A L A R = ‘common axis’. 

The lines are all in the plane of the axes and rigidly fixed in relation to one another; 
P thus lies in the plane of symmetry of the head. The forms coming along PA ^ and 
PA r will coincide at C, having retained their configuration and orientation (see 
Fig. C. III. 1). 


III. 2 [11-16] * 1 15 

which the visual axes E l O and E r O converge, is ‘differently situated in 
direction with respect to the eyes’: that is. O' is located to the right of E l O and 
to the left of E r O , and the directions are reversed for O". See note on [22]. 

[11-16] These now show how the two nearly identical images in the eyes 
proceed through the cavities of the optic nerves to the middle of the ‘common 
nerve’ where they coincide and become one. The attached Figure C. III. 3, 
fully described but not supplied by I. H., helps to shorten his wordy, though 
essentially geometrical, explanation. (The figures supplied in Risner’s edition, 
pp. 76, 77 and 78 are those of Vitellonis Optica , pp. 100, 104 and 108 [top], 
respectively.) 



Figure C. III. 4 


Commentary 


ii 6 

[18] i. ‘ it will be sharper’: fa-takunu . . . ashadda tahaqquqan/erit magis 
certijicata. 

[19] 1. ‘but the object’s form will not be distinct but confused’: ilia anna $ura 
tahu laysa takunu muhaqqaqatan bal takunu mushtabiha/sed tamen forma eius non erit 
verificata, sed dubitabilis. 

[19] 2. ‘ the form . . . will be one and also distinct’: $ura wdhida wa ma e a 
dhalika muhaqqaqa/una forma, et verificata. 



Figure C. III. 5 


[19] 3. ‘ the form . . . will be undefined and indistinct’: . . . mushtabiha ghayr 
muhaqqaqa/non certijicata. 

[ 20 ] I. ‘ distinct and well defined . . . indefinite and indistinct’: muhaqqaqan 
ghayra mushtabihin . . . multabisan ghayra muhaqqaqin/ certijicata et indubitabilis 
. . . non certijicata. 

[21] i.‘ an indefinite form’: [$ura] multabisa/ forma . . . dubitabilis. 

[22] An object O, or 0 2 (Fig. C. III. 4), placed between the visual axes a h a n 
before or beyond the point of fixation F , and, therefore, located on different 


117 


III. 2 [25-50] 

sides of the axes, will be seen double. The figure represents a special case (not 
specified in the text) in which O t and 0 2 lie on the common axis MF. 
Compare Ptol. Opt., 11, 31-35; Lejeune, Euclide etPtolemee , pp. 132-34. 

[23] F remains the point of fixation. Fig. C. HI. 5 illustrates two cases of the 
generally described situation — namely the cases in which an object O, or O z 
is placed on one of the axes, before or beyond F, respectively. As seen by E Ry 
the object O t , on the axis a„ will project an image at the Centre of the common 
nerve. As seen through the ray O t E L , however, the same object will project an 
image to the right of the Centre (0^^ being to the right of its respective axis). 
O, will thus be seen double. It is easy to see that the image projected by 0 2 
through a r will be at the Centre, while the image projected through the left ray 
0 2 El will be to the left of the Centre. 

[25-50] The experimental examination in these paragraphs consists of five 
experiments which it might be well to illustrate diagrammatically. 



Figure C. III. 6 



1 1 8 


Commentary 


Experiment! ([29]): 

With both eyes focused on the object at K (Fig. C. III. 6), the point in which 
the common axis EZ cuts the transverse line HT at right angles: 

(1) The two objects at H and T, and all points on HT, are seen single; the 
line HT appears as a single line; and 

(2) The line EZ is seen as two lines that intersect at K , and so is each of the 
diameters AD and BG. 

Not specified are the exact positions of the doubled lines. In [51] it is stated 
that the farther diameters are farther away from the common axis than the true 
diameters; and an explanation is offered in [52]. 

Experiment 2 ([30]): 

With the eyes fixed on the object at H or at T — a case in which the visual 
axes are not symmetrically situated with respect to the common axis EZ 
(Fig- C. III. 7): 


G 


H 


A 

Figure C. III. 7 





III. 2 (2 $-50) 1 19 

(1) The objects at H, K y T, and all points on HT, are seen single; the line HT 
appears as a single line; and 

(2) The line FZ, and each of the diameters AD and BG, are seen double. 
Again, as in Experiment 1, the positions of the doubled lines are not 

specified. 

Experiment 3 ([31]): 

With two objects at L and Ton the common axis EZ (= c), before and after 
K, respectively, and with the eyes focused on K (Fig. C. III. 8): 

(1) The two objects appear as four — two over to the right, and two over to 
the left; and 

(2) Each of the four objects ( i.e . images) appears on one of the two lines into 
which c has been doubled. 



Figure C. III. 8 


Call the two lines into which the line c has been doubled c + , c“, where the 
superscribed plus and minus signs designate clockwise and counter-clockwise 
rotation, respectively. Call the images of L and Fon these two lines L + , L , 




120 


Commentary 


121 


F + and F . The two images to the right are L , F + , and the two to the left are 
L\ F- 

I. H. says nothing about how far apart and c are, or about the exact 
positions of the images of L and F on these two lines. This is in contrast to 
Ptolemy who commits himself, incorrectly as it turns out, in both respects 
(see Lejeune, Euclide et Ptolemee, pp. 148-53). Our symbolic representation 
serves to express I. H.’s reports without adding specifications not actually 
stated by him. 

Nor does the text of [3 1] say which image belongs to which eye. It is clear, 
however, from the preceding account (see in particular [22]) that the right 
image LT is seen by the left eye at B, while the left image L + is seen by the right 
eye at A\ and vice versa for the images of F. In modern terminology, the double 
images of L are heteronymous, and the double images of Fare homonymous 
(see Helmholtz, Physiological Optics , ill, p. 402). 


III. 2 [25-50] 

Experiment 4 ([32]): 

Three cases are considered: 

(a) With the eyes fixed on K (Fig. C. III. 9a), and the objects O,, 0 2 placed at 
two points on one of the diameters, then on the other, one object, O iy before, 
and the other, 0 2 , beyond K : 

Each of the two objects, and each of the diameters, appears double. 

For the case illustrated in our figure, O i and 0 2i and all points on the 
diameter AD , are seen through the axial ray of the right eye at A. O, and all 
points on AK are seen by the left eye at B through rays to the right of their 
respective axes; while O z and all points on KD are seen by the same eye 
through rays to the left of their respective axes. The situation is, of course, 
reversed for points on BG. See note on [23]. 

(b) With the eyes fixed on K (Fig. C. III. 9b), and the objects O,, 0 2 placed 
on the near segments of the diameters: 

The two objects appear as four — two closer together, and two farther 
apart. 



Figure C. III. 9a 


Figure C. III. 9b 



122 


Commentary 


III. 2 [25-50] 


123 


Call the diameters through the right and left eyes r and /, respectively. Their 
double images may be called r + , r~; / + , /', using the plus and minus signs to 
designate clockwise and counter-clockwise rotation, respectively. Then the 
two closer images of O n 0 2 will be those on r* and /“, and the two farther 
apart will be those on r~ and / + . 

(c) With the eyes fixed on K (Fig. C. III. 9c), and the two objects placed on- 
the far segments of the diameters: 

The two objects appear as four, as in case (fc), two closer together and two 
farther apart. 



Figure C. III. 9c 


The two closer images of objects O i9 0 2 are those on / and r + , and the two 
farther apart are those on / + and r~. See note 1 on [32]. 

Experiment 5 ([33]): 

The eyes are fixed on the middle object at K (Fig. C. III. 10) while regarding 
an object placed, first, at a point I beyond H but very close to it, then at a point 
Q farther away from H — both / and Q being on the right edge of the board: 



The object appears single when regarded at /, and double when regarded at 
Q. [3 5-42] explain why this is so. I and Q being both seen by rays on the same 
side of their respective axes, the explanation consists in showing that while, in 
the case of the object at /, the rays are nearly equally separated from the axes, 
the difference in separation is great in the case of the object at Q. That is to say, 
the difference between angles KAI and KBI (separating the extra-axial rays 
from their respective axes) is negligible, whereas the difference between 
angles KAQ and KBQ is not. The final conclusion is: objects are seen single 
that are located on the same side of the visual axes and are seen by rays equally, 
or practically equally, distant from their respective axes ( [41] ); and objects are 
seen double that do not satisfy both of these conditions ( [43] ). The conclusion 
is already formulated in Ptolemy's Optica , though in somewhat less explicit 
language (Lejeune, Euclide et Ptolemee, pp. 141-42). 

It would have been easy for Ptolemy and I. H. to generalize this conclusion 
further. For points in the plane of the axes, the stated conditions of single 





124 


Commentary 


vision (taken literally) are satisfied only by points on the circumference of the 
circle passing through the centres of the eyes and the point of fixation (the 
so-called ‘horopter circle* or ‘horizontal horopter’ — see Lejeune, ibid., 
pp. 143-44; Na?If, al-Hasan , pp. 301-02; Boring, Sensation and Perception , 
pp. 226-30). But neither Ptolemy nor I. H. draws this consequence. (Note, 
however, that I. H.’s account is not strictly geometrical; see note to [1-10].) 

[26] Ptolemy does not specify the dimensions of his own board (tabula), 
simply describing it as of ‘moderate’ size (Ptol. Opt., 111, 43). He paints the 
board black and specifies the colours of the lines drawn on its surface: red and 
yellow for the diameters through the left and the right eye, respectively; white 
for the line along the common axis; and green for the line through the point of 
fixation at right angles to the common axis (ibid., in, 44). I. H.’s cubit is about 
50 cm and his digit about 2 cm (Na?If, al-Hasan , p. 304). The board ( lawh ) he 
uses is, therefore, approximately 50X8 cm. He specifies neither the ‘different’ 
colours of the cylindrical objects nor the ‘bright’ colours of the lines he draws 
on his ‘pale-coloured’ board, but paints both diameters in a single colour. 

[29] 1. As in Ptol . Opt., hi, 26-27. 

[32] 1. The words in angle brackets are missing from E, A 3 and Kamal 
al-DIn’s paraphrase in Tanqih, 1, p. 252. The English translation is from 
Risner’s text: ‘inveniet ilia quatuor.' Nam utraque diametrorum apparebit 
duplex; quapropter apparebunt super utraque linearum, quae sunt unius 
diametri in rei veritate, duo individua, unum in parte visus et aliud ultra 
individuum positum in medio’ (R 82:28-30). 

[41] 1 ‘ the distances of the rays’, i.e. their distances from their respective 
axes, measured by the angles made with the axes. 

[46] 1. ‘above and below the axis’, that is, round about the axis. 

[46] 2. These two observations are true only of the segments of the diam- 
eters before the intersection point. The directions are reversed for the farther 
segments. 

[48] 1. ‘ that an object . . . from the axis’. A fuller expression of this state- 
ment would be: that an object will be seen single if the rays that meet on it are 
situated on the same side with respect to the axes, and there is no great 
discrepancy between their distances from their respective axes. See note on 
[1— 10]. 

[5i~54] Paragraph [51] specifies (1) that, of the four doubled diameters, 
when both eyes are focused on their point of intersection, the two wider apart 
are further separated from the common axis than the real diameters. [51] also 
asserts (2 a) that, gazing at the intersection point with one eye only, the two 
diameters appear as two, but wider apart than their true separation; and 
(2 b) that the diameter next to the covered eye appears farther from the 
common axis than its true position. [52-54] interpret each one of these 


HI 2 [51-54] I2S 

observations. To be noted in particular is the remark, in [53], that an object 
intercepting the axial ray from one eye (while the other is closed) appears 
closer to the common axis — but not (as Ptolemy asserts) on the common 
axis. [52] gives a brief explanation why the diameters appear closer to the 
common axis, but not coincident with it, when both eyes are focused on their 
point of intersection. 

It will be relevant to quote here I. H.’s criticism, in the Dubitationes in 
Ptolemaeum, of the account he read in Ptolemy’s Optica of a similar situation 
(see Ptol. Opt., hi, 44; Lejeune, Euclide et Ptolemee, pp. 160-63). 

[Ptolemy] . . . says in his discussion of visual errors, where he describes the board 
on which he draws the variously coloured lines, that when sight gazes at the middle 
object assumed in the middle of the board at the point of intersection of the two 
diameters, then the two lines or diameters representing the visual axes will be seen 
as a single line that coincides with the common axis, viz. the line perpendicular to 
the line joining the centres of the two eyes at its middle. 

Now this is an error attested both by reasoning and experience. I refer to his 
statement that the lines along the visual axes are seen as a single line. For the 
extremities of these two lines are at the centres of the eyes and never separated from 
them, and, therefore, these extremities are never united on the common axis, but 
always remain separate. 

Moreover, these two lines intersect at the middle object; therefore they cannot 
but remain so, and can never be seen as one, though they appear to approach each 
other while still intersecting. 

Ptolemy fell into this error because when he assumed two objects placed on the 
axes, and gazed with both eyes at the middle object, he found the two objects united 
on the common axis. Now this occurs only when the assumed objects are close to 
the middle object. If, however, they are close to the eyes, they do not become one, 
but approach each other while remaining separate. The reason is that the visual axes 
appear to approach each other when the gaze is fixed on the middle object, the 
distance between them becoming less than the true distance. Thus when two 
objects are placed on the axes close to the middle object, or point of intersection, the 
two objects come together; but when placed close to the eyes they approach each 
other without being united — unless the eyes, or one of them, shift their gaze so that 
the axes now converge on one of the objects placed on the axes. In this case, that object 
will be seen single by means of the two axes, and the two objects will be seen as two by means 
of rays outside the axes, and thus the two objects will be seen as three. 

If, however, the eyes gaze at the middle object, and the two objects placed on the 
axes are close to the eyes, then the two objects will be seen as four, two farther apart 
from each other, and two closer together but not united. 

Experience also supports what we have said. For, when an experimental 
examination is made of the lines drawn on the board described by Ptolemy — with 
the eyes placed at the extremities of the diameters that intersect at the middle object 
— the matter will be found to be as we have stated. That is, the axes will be found to 
converge and intersect at the middle object; the two objects placed close td the 
middle object will be united, and the objects far from the middle object will 


126 


Commentary 


127 


approach each other but remain separate, unless one of the eyes shifts its gaze from 
the middle object; and the extremities of the axes will always be found at the eyes. 

Thus both experience and reasoning testify that what Ptolemy has said regarding 
the unity of the visual axes with the common axis is false and impossible. But this 
notion is the principle he laid down for errors of vision, and on which he based the 
errors that arise in regard to positions of visible objects. Since this notion is false, it 
follows that all of what he has based upon it regarding errors of vision is invalid and 
has no secure explanation (al-Shukuk a 'la Batlamyus , pp. 65-67). 

The sentence in italics needs clarification. Following is an account of my 
understanding of it. 

In Fig. C. III. 11, the ‘two objects’ O, and 0 2y are fixed on the diameters 
AK, BK , respectively, at two points appreciably closer to the eyes at A and B 
than to the ‘middle object’ at the point of intersection K ; let them be placed at 
equal distances from A and B. 



Figure C. III. 11 


III. 2 [83] 

(a) With the eyes focused on O,: 0 ; is seen single by the axial rays AO n 
BO ly and 0 2 is also seen single by the extra-axial rays A 0 2> BO z — both rays 
being on the same side, viz. to the left, of their respective axes and equidistant 
from them (the angle O z AO t = the angle 0 2 B 0 j). 

The united image projected by O z through the extra-axial rays will be to the 
left of the united image projected by O, through the axes. 

(b) Now with the eyes focused on 0 2 : 0 2 will project a united image 
through the axial rays AO z , BO z ; and O, will also project a united image 
through the extra-axial rays AO t , BO n both of these being to the right of their 
respective axes and at equal distances from them. 

Thus, by means of the extra-axial rays, the two objects will give rise to two 
united images, one to the left and one to the right of the united image projected 
through the axes; and, as the eyes shift their gaze from one object to the other, 
the two objects will be seen as three . 

[ 51 ] I* As in [46], I. H. must be talking about the segments of the diameters 
closer to the eye. His statement obviously does not apply to the farther 
segments. The point is noted by Kamal al-Dln, Tanqih , 1, p. 254. 

[ 51 ] 2. ‘ and will see the distance . . . edge of the board’: wa yard al-bu'd 
alladhx baynahumd awsa'a min miqdarihi al-haqxqiyyi 'ala inkhiratihi alladhx awsa'u 
mawdi'in minhu huwa * ardu al-lawh/et videbit spatium inter eas maius quam in rei 
veritate secundum suam pyramidationem, quod autem est magis amplum de ipso est 
latitudo tabulae. 

[52] 1. The reference is to III, 7(25]. 

[55-86] Following immediately upon the investigation of double vision, 
these paragraphs conclude the chapter with an account of distinct monocular 
and binocular vision as a function of the object’s position and orientation 
relative to the visual axis or axes, and of the object’s distance from the eye(s). 
General conclusions of the observations made are in [61], [71] and [79], and an 
interpretation is offered in [80-86]. 

[71] 1. ‘ even when the object lies on the radial axis’. E, in agreement with 
A 3 and R, reads ‘even when the object does not lie on the radial axis’. The 
correction seems to be in order; see [66]: ‘the form of an object that is 
excessively inclined to the radial axis will be confused’. 

[82] 1. ‘ traced out’: intaqashat/imprimitur. Naqasha is to impress (as with a 
signet) or to engrave, but also to draw or paint. See I, 2[22], note 1. 

[82] 2. That ‘moderateness’ is a relative concept is fully explained in 
Chapter 3. 

[83] 1. ‘ due ... to . . . that surpasses the form*: min qiydsin khdrijin 'an 
al-sura/ex ratione extra formam. 

[ 83 ] 2. ‘ according to the object’s orientation’: bi-hasab wad' ih/ secundum 
positionem eius. I. H. has a special word for ‘orientation’ ( nu$ba ) which he does 
not use in this instance; see note to II, 3 [94-120]. 


128 


Commentary 


129 


CHAPTER 3 

The conditions of vision having been stated in Bks I and II, and the conditions 
for clear and distinct visual perception having been examined in the preceding 
chapter, it is first proposed in the present chapter to enumerate the conditions 
for veridical vision, which add up to eight, including soundness or health of 
the eye as a further requisite ([1-5]). Six of the eight conditions are to be 
fulfilled by the object and the external medium (distance of the object from the 
eye, the object’s being in a certain position relative to the visual lines, 
luminosity, being of a certain magnitude, opacity, and the transparency of the 
intervening atmosphere); and two relate to the percipient (duration of percep- 
tion and health of the eye). Kamal al-DIn adds a ninth condition, i.e. at- 
tentiveness (in$iraf al-nafs wa tawajjuhuha ila ma yaridu ilayhd min al-mub$arat ), 
without which, he says, the soul would be oblivious of what it is receiving 
from external objects — Tanqih , 1, p. 264. It is to be noted that the six objective 
conditions are among the visible properties ( al-ma'dni al-mub$ara/intentiones 
visibiles) enumerated in Bk II. In fact ‘properties’ and ‘conditions’ here render 
one and the same word in the Arabic text (see [33], note 1). 

I. H.’s expressions for true, correct or veridical perception are idrak sahih 
and idrak muhaqqaq , the last word being also the same adjective he uses for 
distinct (as opposed to blurred or indefinite) perception as well as for verified 
or ascertained perception (as distinguished from perception at a glance, or 
idrak bi-al-badiha — see II, 4(3, 29-32] ). In the context of the present chapter a 
perception is $ahih or muhaqqaq if it is perception of the object ‘as it is’ ('ala ma 
huu/a 'alayh); a veridical visual perception is obtained when the perceiver 
correctly grasps all properties of the object that are possible objects of vision, 
or when each and every one of these properties has been perceived ‘as it is’ (see 
opening comment to Bk II, ch. 4). 

In [6] the important concept of a ‘range ( 'ard/latitudo ) of moderateness’ is 
re-introduced, and the concept is formally defined in [15]. The definition may 
be paraphrased as follows. For any given visible object, there exists for each 
one of the eight conditions a certain range or latitude, called ‘the range of 
moderateness’, outside which that object is not correctly perceived — that is, 
not perceived as having all those properties, and only those properties in the 
object, that are capable of being apprehended by the sense of sight. Visual 
error occurs when one or more of the conditions for veridical vision fall 
outside the limits of the moderate range. It is further stated in [15] that the 
limits of such a range for a given condition will vary with each of the 
remaining conditions. Having illustrated the concept of moderate range in 
[6-14] with reference to an object’s distance and luminosity by varying other 
conditions (position, size, opacity, etc.), and taking distance from the eye as an 


III. 3 [ 33 ] 

example, it is concluded in [15] that, for a given object, the range of that 
object’s distance within which a true perception of the object can be obtained, 
will depend on all the other conditions of vision including the object’s 
illumination, colour and fine detail. [16-25] further illustrate how the moder- 
ate range for distance varies with each of the other conditions. In general, the 
illustrative examples consist in varying each of the conditions one at a time to 
show the dependence of distance (or, rather, of distance-perception) on the 
varied condition. Then, taking one condition after another, each of the 
paragraphs (26-32] enumerates the other conditions on which the moderate 
range for the selected condition depends. The chapter as a whole thus 
illustrates a definite procedure which can be described as follows: for a given 
object, let C be the Condition whose moderate range is said to depend on all or 
some of certain relevant conditions or properties c t -c n (in the examples 
mentioned in [26-32], n varies from 7 to 1 1); to determine this dependence one 
condition after another from among c t —c n is varied while the other conditions 
are assumed to be constant. 

[ 7 ] I. In discussions of position (wad'), here and in following paragraphs, a 
distinction is maintained between ma’il 'an (displaced from) and md'il 'ala 
(oblique or inclined to). 

[ 7 ] 2. 1 true identity’: haqiqa. 

[15] 1. ‘a definition of this range that separates it from what falls outside it 
by way of excess [or falling short]’: bi-haddin yajrizuhu 'an al-ijrdt alladhi 
yakhruju 'anhu. IJrat seems to be taken here to cover both cases of falling outside 
the limits of the moderate range. 

[15] 2. ‘The extreme limit of the range’: ghayat al-'ard. 

[23] 1. ‘extended interval of time’: al-zaman al-mutanaffis . Mutanaffs is used 
in this sense in III, 5(12, 13]. The comparative anfas occurs in III, 6(14]. 
Ill, 6[26] employs fasih (wide) in the sense of mutanaffis. 

[ 25 ] 1. ‘varies with the conditions we have detailed’: yakunu bi-hasab al- 
ma'dni allati fi al-mub$ar allati bayyanna tafiilahd . The Arabic would seem to 
suggest that here al-ma'dni refers to the properties in the object, not to the 
conditions for perceiving the object as it is, al-ma'dni allati biha yatimmu idraku 
al-mub$ar 'ala ma huxva 'alayh. See [33], note 1; and [34], note 1. 

[33] 1. In this paragraph ‘properties* and ‘conditions’ render one word: 
al-ma ' ani ’. The enumerated conditions for visual perception, with the exception 
of time and soundness or health of the eye, are among the visible properties 
(< al-ma 'anial-mub$ara) set out in detail in Bk II — see II, 3 [44]; see comment (b) to 
Bk II, under ma'na. Using the concept of moderate range it is stated in this 
paragraph that an object is seen as it is when all relevant conditions for veridical 
vision fall within that range with respect to that particular object. 


130 


Commentary 


[33] 2. • will vary with other properties of the object’: yakunu bihasab 
al-ma'ani al-baqiya allati fi dhalik al-mub$ar. See [25], note 1. 

[ 34 ] I. ‘ the conditions for perceiving that object as it is’: al-ma'am allati jx 
dhalik al-mub$ar allati bihd yatimmu idrdk al-mub$ar e ald md huwa c alayh y the 
properties in that object, through which the object is perceived as it is. See 
[33], note 2. 

CHAPTER 4 

There are three kinds of visual error corresponding to the three modes of 
visual perception — by pure sensation, by recognition and by inference at the 
time of perception — see II, 3 [1-2 5]. [2] states again the distinction drawn in 
Bk II between objects perceived by recognition after they have been originally 
apprehended by inference, and unfamiliar objects the apprehension of which 
requires an act of inference at the time of seeing them. The rest of the chapter 
( [4-9] ) provides examples ( amthila ) of errors in the three modes of perception. 
The example given in [5] for error in pure sensation relates to a situation 
(looking at a multi-coloured object in a dimly lit place) in which the perceiver 
fails to identify the object’s ‘true’ colours, taking them to be one and the same 
‘black’ or ‘dark’ colour. The example in [7] for error in inference at the time of 
perception relates to movement: the illusory movement of the moon behind a 
thin cloud is an error in inference ‘because movement can be perceived only by 
inference at the time of sensation’. In all the examples of errors of recognition 
and of inference at the time of perception, the cause considered is excessive 
remoteness of the misjudged object. 

[1] 1. See in particular II, 3 [1— 17]. 

[x] 2. ‘ pure sensation’: mujarrad al-hiss } in [1—2]; mujarrad al-ihsas , in [4-5]. 
See comment (b) to Bk II, under ihsas , etc. 

[1] 3. See II, 3 [ 49 -s 6 ]. 

[2] 1. ‘kinds of objects’. The first word renders anwa\ species, in the sense 
of classes or categories. 

[2] 2. ‘by means of their distinctive marks’: bi-al-amarat . On amara see 
opening comments to Bk II, chs 3 and 4. 

[2] 3. ‘shape . . . figure’: shakl . . . hay ’a. See note on II, 3 [127-34]. 

[5] x. ‘ such as dark blue, wine, purpure’: ka-al-kuhli wa al-khamriwa al-farfin 
(the last word thus vo welled in A 3 ). See comment (a) to Bk I, ch. 4. 

[ 9 ] x. ‘ categories’: al-anwa e \ see [2], note 1. 

CHAPTER 5 

The chapter title in A 3 has ‘properties’ (or ‘ conditions’) lal-ma'ani for 
‘causes’/d/- 7 /a/, the reading adopted in E. The correction, justified in itself, is 


III. 6 [6] 13 1 

supported by the titles of Chapters 6 and 7, both of which have al- e ilal y and by 
the text of section [4]. In Risner’s edition the title of Chapter 5 simply reads: 
De qualitatibus deceptionum visus, quae fiunt solo sensu. The chapter is a series of 
observations illustrating how errors occur in regard to the ‘strength’ and 
‘weakness’ of light and colour when the conditions for veridical vision fall 
outside the moderate range. The errors investigated are errors in ‘pure 
sensation’ in as much as light and colour are objects of pure sensation. It is 
noted again in [3] that to perceive what a certain colour (or light) is, is 
perception by recognition and, therefore, errors in regard to the quiddities of 
light and colour are errors in recognition. 

[1] 1. ‘by pure sensation’: bi-mujarrad al-hiss , the expression consistently 
used throughout this chapter in place of bi-mujarrad al-ihsas. See III, 4(1], 
note 2. 

[I] 2. ‘ delicate’: raqiqa , i.e.pale or light, as opposed to dark (mu^lima) 
colours. See comment (a) to Bk I, ch. 4. 

[3] 1. ‘what ... is’: ma’iyya , quiddity. 

[ 4 ] x a single indeterminate colour’: lawn wahid mushtabih. 

[ 7 ] 1 • ‘ misanni- green’, see comment (a) to Bk I, ch. 4. 

[7] 2. ‘light colours’: al-alwan al-musfira. See comment (a) to Bk I, ch. 4. 

[ 7 ] 3 * saturated’: mushba'a . See I, 4[23], note 1; also comment (a) to Bk I, 
ch. 4. 

[ 7 ] 4 / uncertain’: mushtabih(a). 

[10] r. ‘ sign’: amara (clue). See opening comments to Bk II, chs 3 and 4. 

[12] 1. • extended interval of time’: zamanan mutanaffisan. See III, 3(23], 
note 1 . 

CHAPTER 6 

The first three paragraphs are on errors of recognition generally, their 
classification into errors of recognition of individuals or of species or of both, 
and on the role of memory in recognition (see II, 3(21], 4(12-15]). The rest of 
the chapter [4-30] consists of examples of errors of recognition in regard to 
each of the visible properties when these fall outside the moderate range. 

[I] 1. ‘ what the visible objects are’: ma’iyyat jami* al-mub$arat y quiddities of 
all visible objects. 

[1] 2. ‘what an object is’: md’iyyat al~mub$ar. 

[1] 3. Here, as in some cases elsewhere, ‘to recognize’ and ‘to know’ render 
one word: ma e rifa. In the Optics , e ilm is employed less frequently than ma'rifa. 

[6] 1. ‘shrub’: nabatan , plant(s). 




16 


Commentary 


i33 


132 

[ 7 ] I- ‘unfamiliar objects’: ma'anin ghariba. 

[8] 1. ‘if sight fails to ascertain the form of an object’: fa-lay sa yatahaqqaqu 
al-basaru $uratahu , i.e. if sight fails to obtain a clear and distinct form of the 
object and thus fails to identify the object correctly. 

[ 9 ] 1. ‘and will not mistake its form’: wa la tashtabihu e alayhi $uratuhu. 

[10] 1. The reference is to Bk III, ch. 2. 

[Hi 1 ‘ broader’: anfas. Mutanajfis is used in relation to time, e.g. in III, 5[i2, 
13]. See III, 3[23], note i. 

[ 14 ] 2. ‘if the flea does not immediately jump and remains motionless’: idha 
lam yathbut [sic] al-barghuthu, wa kana sakinan. Lam yathbut (does not remain 
stationary) is clearly an error for lam yathib (does not jump). 

[16] 1. ‘different in kind’: wa minghayri naw'ih , a reference to the ‘quality’ or 
hue of the colour. 

[18] 1. ‘yellow’. E has akhdar , green. A 3 , M and S all have asghar, as 
faithfully reported in E. But the correct reading must be asjar. All three Arabic 
words are similar in shape. 

[18] 2. ‘dark blue . . . blue’: kuhlT . . . azraq. 

[20-22] Compare Ptoi Opt., 11, 107: \ . . Fit etiam precedens Colorado, 
cum aspexerimus aliquid per telas consumptas, subtiles, sanguineas uel 
purpureas. Nam uisus transit per tramas telarum sine fractione et portat secum 
in transitu aliquid de colore rerum per quas transit; et sic apparet res ilia habere 
colorem eorum que uisus penetrat.’ 

[21] 1. ‘the sentient’: al-hass, i.e. the sentient faculty or organ. See comment 
(b) to Bk II. 

[ 23 ] 1. This is the earliest reference known in Arabic literature to the 
technique of the shadow play, which is generally believed to have been 
originally brought over to the Middle East from South-East Asia or India. It is 
known, however, that shadow plays were among forms of entertainment at 
the Fatimid court in Cairo. The plays came to be such a favourite of Egyptian 
sultans that one of them is said to have carried the necessary equipment with 
him on his pilgrimage to Mecca in 778/1377, much to the consternation of the 
people (see Taymur, ‘ Khaydl al-zill , etc.\ p. 22; Kahle, ‘The Arabic shadow 
play in Egypt’; El 2 , s. v. Khaydl al-%ill (byj. M. Landau). 

The Arabic terms corresponding to the English expressions adopted in this 
paragraph are as follows: images = al-khaydl , illusionist = al-mukhayyil, 
figures = ashkha$. The brevity of the description, and the use of the definite 
article before ‘curtain’ (al-izar), would suggest that I. H. was assuming his 
readers’ familiarity with how the plays were produced. 

[24] I- ‘ those figures’. A 3 and E have: tilka al-a?ldl (those shadows). Even 
with this ‘emendation’ the sentence remains somewhat puzzling. It would not 
be far fetched, however, to assume that removing the curtain provides the 


III. 7 [13-23] 

knowledge in the presence of which the viewer will not, on a later occasion, 
mistake the shadows on the curtain (or wall) for real objects. 

[ 27 ] I- See comment (a) to Bk I, ch. 4. 

[27] 2. ‘a body with a bright non- white colour’: jismin dh\ lawnin mushriqin 
sibghin. $ibgh , dye, must refer here to colours other than white or black or the 
shades of grey between them, that is, to what we would call ‘chromatic 
colours’. 

chapter 7 

The main reason why this chapter is so long (it is much longer than the 
preceding six chapters put together) is that it deals with errors of vision in 
inference, and these, as the author tells us in [1 ], make up the largest number of 
visual errors. The chapter falls into eight sections corresponding to the eight 
conditions that give rise to visual errors when one or more of them exceed or 
fall short of ‘the moderate range’ for a given object of vision. It is shown in 
each section how sight errs in regard to every one of the visible properties 
when only one of the eight conditions falls outside the moderate range. Every 
section is thus in turn divided into sub-sections equal in number to the 
properties considered. 

To make clear the structure of this long chapter I have distinguished the 
eight sections by capital letters from A to H, and supplied them with headings 
not found in the Arabic manuscripts. The sub-sections I have indicated by 
Arabic numerals in parentheses; they are indicated by the alphabetical abjad 
notation in the manuscripts and in E (see Introduction, sec. VII). As in the rest 
of the Commentary, however, all references are to the paragraph numbers in 
square brackets, which are continuous throughout the chapter. 

[I] i. 1 composition of the inference’: tartxb al-qiyas, i.e. arrangement or 
ordering of (the propositions in) the inference. 

[ 5 ] 1 ■ awareness’: ihsas, literally, sensation. See comment (b) to Bk II. 

[6] 1. ‘oblique dimension’: al-'ard al-mail. 

[8] 1. See II, 3[i2i-i26], 

[8] 2. Here, as in BkH, ‘figure’ and ‘shape’ translate hay y a and shakl, 
respectively. See note to II, 3[i27— 134]. 

[10] 1. ‘edges’. The Arabic has ‘two edges’, which may appear not to 
include the case of a round surface. 

[13-23] Why distant objects appear smaller than they are. These paragraphs, 
constituting sub-section A(5), attempt to explain why objects look smaller 
than they are when their distance from the eye is disproportionately large. 
Some of the explanations offered might be in need of elucidation. 


134 


Commentary 


135 


One explanation, presented in [14], has to do with the case in which sight 
strives to estimate the size of the distant object by moving the visual axis over 
the whole extent of the object. The long argument boils down to this: 

An object O with a size S 0 is said to be at an excessively great distance d from 
the eye if there exists a smaller magnitude M such that M bears a ‘measurable' 
ratio to S 0 , and M is not visible at d. It follows that any portion R 0 of the object, 
equal in size to M, will not by itself be visible from the same distance d . 

Let M r be the area on the crystalline humour’s surface in which the form 
(image) of R 0 occurs from distance d. 

It is asserted that Mr will not by itself be detected by the sense, even though 
the angle subtended by Mr has a measurable ratio to the angle subtended by 
the form (image) of the whole object. Sensation will occur only after the visual 
axis has moved across the surface of the crystalline over an area greater than 
Mr. 

The conclusion, drawn in [15], is that the part of the eye occupied by the 
form (image) of the whole object will be perceived to be smaller than it is, and 
the same perceptual misjudgement will apply to the object. 

Another explanation, in [16], concerns the case in which the eye is supposed 
to remain fixed before the distant object: 

Let A and B be the ‘limits’ (sing, nihdya) of a line visible as a whole from a 
variable distance. A and B are said to be ‘sensible’, not merely ‘imaginary’ (or 
mathematical), ‘points’ (sing. nuq(a mahsusa ); that is, they are finite ‘parts’ that 
bear a measurable ratio ( nisba muqtadira) to the form of the whole magnitude 
AB. 

A and B are, however, so small that their magnitude, though finite, is 
always ‘ignored’ or not taken into consideration by the sense in estimating the 
size of AB (Id ya ' taddu bihi al-hdss ) . 

As AB approaches or recedes from the viewer, the angle it subtends at the 
centre of the eye will accordingly increase or decrease, and so will the area 
occupied by the form of AB on the surface of the sense-organ; but the magnitude 
of the extreme [ points' or * parts' remains constant. 

Thus, when AB is very remote and the form of it in the eye is very small, the 
sentient power will be ignoring two extreme parts of AB that bear a greater 
ratio to the total magnitude as determined by the visual angle than when AB is 
moderately near and the size of the extreme points is negligible in comparison 
with the larger form produced by AB from this moderate distance. 

Therefore sight will err in estimating the size of the excessively remote 
object, judging it to be smaller than it is. 

A third explanation, offered in [17], rests on two premisses expounded in 
Bk II: the first is that an object subtending a small angle from what is judged to 
be a smaller distance than the true one will be perceived to be smaller than it is; 


III. 7 [17] 

the second is that an excessively remote object is always ‘conjectured’ (hadasa) 
to be nearer than it is, its distance being compared (assimilated) to that of 
familiar objects that subtend angles similar to the one subtended by the remote 
object. Relying on the results of the examination in [16], the argument is 
strengthened further by noting that the angle subtended by the remote object 
will be perceived to be smaller than this angle actually is. Thus both the angle 
of vision and the distance are in this case judged to be smaller than they are. 
Hence the apparent decrease in the size of the object (see Sabra, ‘Psychology 
versus Mathematics. . .’, for a related discussion in connection with the 
‘moon illusion’ problem). 

The explanation in [23] does not seem to advance much beyond those 
considered above: Let M be a small magnitude which is seen from a distance d 
to be smaller than it is — in which case d is an excessively great distance with 
respect to M; then there exists a magnitude N such that N<M, and N has a 
measurable ratio to M, and N would be visible at a distance s<d though 
invisible at a distance equal to d . (N is said to be an ‘excessively small’ 
magnitude because it is wholly invisible at d.) The reason for the apparent 
diminution of M is that sight underestimates the angle subtended by it at the 
eye from the immoderately great distance d (as maintained in [16]). The error 
in regard to the size of the immoderately remote object is thus due to error in 
estimating the angle and the distance. At a moderate and ascertainable 
distance, the error will be due solely to underestimating the angle. 

[14] 1. ‘by estimating the object’s size by the angle of the cone . . . together 
with the magnitude of the object’s distance’: min qiydsihi e izama aUmubsari 
bi-zawiyati al-makhruti . . . wa miqdari budi dhalika al-mub$ari. 

[14] 2. See II, 3 [ 1 3 5 — 1 7 1 ] - 

[14] 3. ‘measurable ratio’: nisba muqtadira , i.e . a ratio having a certain, finite 
quantity or measure (qadr). 

[16] 1. In this paragraph ‘portion’ and ‘part’ translate one word: juz\ The 
differentiation between ‘portion’ and ‘part of that portion’ has the advantage 
of making the argument less confusing. 

[16] 2. ‘imaginary points’: nuqtatayn mutawahhamatayn , i.e. mathematical or 
sizeless points. 

[16] 3 . ‘its magnitude is ignored by the sentient’: laysa ya e taddu al-hdssu 
bi-miqdariha. The expression is repeated several times in the paragraph. The 
sentient ignores or fails to consider the small magnitude because it is unable to 
appreciate it. 

[16] 4. The words in brackets are missing from A 3 , M, and S, and from E. 
The emendation is required by the sense of the argument and is supported by 
the later mention of ‘greater ratio’ in the same paragraph; see also [25]. 

[17] I. ‘ascertained’, ‘certain’: mutayaqqan. 


Commentary 


i37 


136 

[17] 2. As argued in [16]; see [17], note 5. 

[17] 3. ‘by reference to’: bi-al-qiyds ila. 

[17] 4. ‘by estimating ... by means of. . min qiyds . . . hi . . . . 

[17] 5 1 because the error ... as the distance increases’. Again a reference to 
the explanation in [16]; see [17], note 2. 

[19] 1- ‘ fades and weakens’: tataghayyar wa tad'uf. 

[23] 1. See [16]. 

[24—25] Why objects very close to the eye appear to be larger than they are. Sight 
estimates the size of a visible object by comparing the angle subtended by the 
object at the centre of the eye with the estimated distance of the object. In all 
cases the distance that sight is capable of estimating is that between the surface 
of the eye and the object, and this falls short of the ‘real’ distance by an amount 
equal to the radius of the eyeball. For moderately remote objects, the 
difference between the real and the estimated distance is negligible. The 
difference becomes critical when the distance of the object from the surface of 
the eye is less than, equal to or not much larger than the radius of the eye. In 
this case the comparison is made between a large angle and an estimated 
distance appreciably smaller than the real one. (Compare the Mu'tazilite 
explanation, no. 17, paraphrased in the opening comment to Bk III.) 

[33] 1. A reference to III, 4(7— -8]. 

[34] 1. What would be a ‘moderately distant’ object that has a motion equal 
(musawiya) to that of a star?! 

[36] 1. ‘which runs parallel’: al-muwaziya. The ‘interval’ (masafa) from the 
eye to the object may extend along one of the radial lines (khutut al-shu'a') but 
cannot be parallel to all of them. Perhaps the intended word is al-musamita. 

[39-43] Here $ura is obviously a painted picture, not form, except when it 
refers to the object pictured. ‘Paintings’ and ‘painters’ render tazawiq and 
muzawwiqun. The verb shabbaha , as used here by I. H., takes as direct object 
sometimes the picture, sometimes the object. It is translated as ‘to make (a 
surface) look like (an object)’, to imitate, to represent. The context seems to 
require translating nuqush as drawings; see I, 2(22], note 1. 

[39] i- Ptolemy in his Optica, after a brief but clear statement of the principle 
of aerial perspective (bright objects appear to be closer to us than darker ones), 
goes on to illustrate its application in painting, saying that painters represent 
more distant objects by painting them in darker colours: ‘Et ideo pictores 
domorum constituunt co lores rerum quas remotas uolunt ostendere, aereos 
latentes’ ( Ptol . Opt., n, 124). He further observes that a painter would paint the 
prominent part of an object in a brighter colour than that with which he would 
paint a sunken part: ‘Et ideo pictor . . . ponit colorem illius partis quam uult 
eminentem uideri, lucidum; colorem uero illius quam uult cancauum uideri, 
magis latentem et obscuriorem’ (ibid., II, 127). 


III. 7 [ 98 ] 

It is noticeable that although I. H. devotes many words to the art of the 
painter (paragraphs [39-43, 85-86]), and despite his reference to the painter’s 
skill in creating the illusion of depth and solidity by the use of ‘outlines’ and 
‘different colours’, he does not actually spell out what the painter’s trick 
consists in. That he was, however, acquainted with chromatic perspective is 
indicated by his observation later in the book that a darker colour is a clue to 
greater depth (see [250], note 2; also II, 3 [ 1 59] ) . 

[47] 1. A reference to Bk VII, ch. 7. 

[47] 2. See [24-25] and related note. 

[50] 1. ‘ earth-like or dark colours’: turabiyyat al-lawn aw munkasifat al-lawn. 

[50] 2. ‘ subdued’: munkasiran. 

[69] 1. ‘degree’: miqdar , magnitude, amount. 

[71] 1 . ‘top’: taraf, extremity. Ra $ is used in [r 10]. 

[71] 2. See II, 3 [95—99], especially II, 3[97], note I. 

[79] I- ‘ the rays going out . . . from the two eyes’. See II, 3 [i 69], note 2. 

[79] 2. A reference to the experiments described in III, i[i6 ff.]. 

[85] 1. ‘painted pictures’: al-suwar allatt yuzawwiquhd al-musawwirun. 

[85] 2. See [84]. The reference to ‘preceding chapter’ (al-fasl alladht qabla 
hadha ), being a reference to paragraphs [39-43] in Chapter 7, which para- 
graphs make up ‘sub-section A(ii)\ is a clear indication that a division of 
Chapter 7 into smaller sections was intended by the author himself. Traces of 
such a division exist in A 3 ; see E, Introduction, p. 51, and above. Introduc- 
tion, sec. VII, and opening comment to Bk III, ch. 7. 

[85] 3- It should be remembered that for I. H. ‘reflection* ( inikas ) takes 
place only from polished surfaces and only in a determinate direction. The 
light emanating from unpolished illuminated surfaces is not ‘reflected’ light, 
because it radiates in all directions from the light that has been ‘fixed’ in those 
surfaces. See comment (b) to Bk II, ch. 3. 

[85] 4. The proper (‘moderate’) position for viewing a painted surface as a 
painting is not the same as that for viewing it as a physical object possessing 
physical properties. One position excludes the other. 

[92] 1. ‘earth-coloured’: turabiyyat al-lawn. 

[92] 2. ‘ dark-coloured’: al-munkasifat al-lawn . 

[94] i.‘ black areas or bodies (such as wall mirrors)’. Wall mirrors are 
‘black’ because they are made of iron; see I, 3 [90], note 1. 

[95] 1. ‘the perceiver’: al-hass. See comment (b) to Bk II. 

[98] 1. ‘their details’: ma'antha. 

[98] 2. ‘ assuming that the designs are engraved’: idha kanat al-nuqush bi-al- 
hajir. See I, 2(22], note 1. 

[98] 3. How can engraved designs be beautiful when their ‘shapes’ (ashkal) 
as well as their colours are not?! 


Commentary 


i39 


138 

[100] 1. ‘designs and decorative features 1 : aUnuqush wa al-tazdyin. 

[100] 2. ‘designs and embellishments’: al-nuqush wa al-tahasin. 

[104] 1. ‘on two transverse lines in front of the eye 1 : 'ala masafatayn mu'tari- 
datayn li-al-ba$ar. That is, on two lines (intervals) extending across the line of 
sight. 

[no] 1. ‘tip’: ra s. See [71], note 1. 

[117] 1. ‘a circular, irregular or vibratory motion’: yataharrak haraka mus- 
tadtra aw yadtarib aw yarta'id. See [170], note 1. 

[121] 1. ‘pale colour’: lawn musfir. Used several times in this paragraph and 
contrasted with aswad and muzlim (black and dark), musfir clearly refers to a 
light shade of colour approaching white. 

[124] 1. ‘blue eyes, blond hair 1 : zurqa ft 'aynih aw shuqra ft sha'rih. See [127]. 

[127] 1 . ‘such as a blue or grey colour of the eyes, a blond [streak in his hair], 
freckles or other blemishes and marks’: ka-al-zurqa wa al-shuhla wa al-shuqra wa 
al-namash wa al-kalafwa al-athar . See [124], note 1; also [258], note 1. 

[131] 1. ‘of ascertainable size’: mutayaqqanat al-miqdar. 

[134 — 135 ] 1 • Let AB be the horizontal ‘edge’ ( nihaya ) of the object’s inclined 
surface (Fig. C. III. 12); and let A and B be its ‘ends’ (sing, taraf). TS is the 
‘transverse’ ( mu'tarid ) line through M at the middle of AB. TS , being 



E 


Figure C. III. 12 


III. 7 [212] 

perpendicular to the visual axis EM, ‘defines the frontal direction’ (yahuddu 
samta al-muwajaha). AB is assumed to be very small in comparison with the 
object’s distance from the eye at E. 

The distances of the ends A and B from TS will also be very small, their sum 
being approximately equal to the difference between distances AE and BE; 
therefore, the eye will not detect the deviation of AB from the frontal direction 
because it will fail to discern the difference between distances AE and BE, even 
if the eye is moderately distant from AB. 

It is further asserted in [135] that only when the length of AB is such that 
(. AR + BS) bears a sensible ratio to ME will the inclination of AB be 
perceptible. 

[140] 1. ‘estimated by means of some measure’ : tuqds bi-miqyas. 

[ 145 ] 1 ‘similar intervals’: (al-) masafatayn (« aU)mutashabihatayn . The ‘simi- 
larity’ intended here must be one of shape, not of magnitude. Compare the use 
of ‘similarity 1 in the same sense in [146]. The words for equality and inequality 
in both paragraphs are tasdwt and ikhtilaf 

[146] 1. ‘ two similar distances’: masafatayn mutashabihatayn. See [145], 
note x . 

[162] 1. ‘size’. Here the text has hajm (instead of the usual 'izam or miqdar ), 
and the same word is applied both to the object itself and to its visible 
properties: hajm al-ma'am allati ft al-mub$ar. 

[170] 1. ‘a rotary or irregular or vibratory motion’: haraka 'ala al-istidara aw 
harakat idtirab aw harkat tarajjuh . [1 17] uses irti'dd in the sense of tarajjuh. 

[178] 1. ‘glass panes’: al-jdmat al-zujaj. See I, 3(105], note 1. 

[183] 1. ‘it appears to be white’, that is, untinted. See comment (a) to Bk I, 
ch. 4. 

[ 183 ] 2. ‘ of a darker tint’: $ibghan. See III, 6[27], note 2. 

[187] 1. ‘designs and sculpted figures’: nuqush wa tamathil. See [189], note 1. 

[189] 1. ‘designs, engravings or mouldings’ nuqush wa khurush wa tamathil. 
See [187], note 1. 

[200] 1. ‘and away from it’: wa md'ilan 'anhu. Probably what is meant is that 
the line of sight is inclined to (ma’il 'ala) the surface of the smoky area. See 

[197]. 

[202] 1. ‘Sight will only perceive . . . occupy’. The English represents an 
interpretation of the Arabic text rather than a strict translation of it. The words 
bi-iltibas and bi-ikhtildf in E 499:24, 25, respectively, occur in A 3 , the first as a 
correction by the copyist from bi-al-qiyds. 

[212] I. 4 such as the proportionateness of an animal’s members ... or 
different and proportionate colours’: ka-tanasub a' da' aUhayawan . . . wa al - 
alwdn al-mukhtalifa al-mutandsiba. On proportion as a factor in beauty, see note 
on II, 3(200-231]. 



140 


Commentary 


[217] X. ‘ scans the interval’: istaqra’a al-masdfa. See note on I, i[6], under 
istiqra’. 

[234] 1. See II, 3 [57], note 2. 

[235] 1. Seell, 3 [57—59]- 

[250] 1. ‘ dim-sightedness’: 'asha. 

[250] 2. A ‘white’ object appears to be closer to the eye than a ‘dark- 
coloured’ one, although the two objects may be equally remote and equally 
illuminated. The illusion is first cited as an example of error (in regard to 
distance) owing to weakness or impairment of eyesight. Later in the same 
paragraph, however, an explanation is offered in terms of an inference that 
seems to be independent of the condition of the eye: a white object is more 
manifest than a dark-coloured one; and manifestness implies (is a clue to) 
nearness; therefore, etc. Compare Ptolemy on chromatic perspective in Ptol. 
Opt ., 11, 124, 127; see above, [39], note 1; and II, 3 [159]. 

[250] 3. ‘extended inference’: qiyas fihi bu'd. See [254], note 1. 

[254] r. ‘extended inference’: qiyas ba'id. See [250], note 3. 

[258] 1. ‘a squint’: hawal. 

[258] 2. ‘ the place of last sensation’: mawdi' al-ihsds al-akhir. That is, at the 
front of the brain where the form is perceived by ‘the last sentient’. See I, 6[68, 
69, 79]- 

[261] i.‘ because the spirit . . . moves in its own place and turns and 
undulates’: li-anna al-ruh . . . tataharrak wa tadur . . . wa tatamawwaj . 

[261] 2. Ptolemy mentions the vertigo phenomenon ( scotomia = skotoma ) in 
Optica , 11, 12 1, and attributes it to a turning round of the visual ray ( reuolutio 
uisibilis radii) in consequence of which the external objects appear to revolve. 
He refers to a to-and-fro motion ( uacillatio ) of the apex of the visual cone 
( principium uisus) but makes no mention of the visual spirit. (See Lejeune’s 
note 103 in Ptol. Opt., p. 73.) I. H.’s interpretation of the phenomenon shows 
a preponderance of Galenic influence; see Siegel, Galen on Sense Perception , 
pp. 138-39. A similar interpretation to I. H.’s can be found in Avicenna’s De 
anima where the source is indicated as ‘the books on medicine’ (see Rahman’s 
edition of the Arabic text, pp. 156 and 164; and Van Riet’s edition of the Latin 
translation, Liber De anima I-II—III, p. 256 and n. 60, and Liber De anima 

IV-K p-3). 

Paragraph [261] is one of several passages in Arabic philosophical literature 
that explain the persistence of non-natural motion in a body, not by the 
continual exertion of an external agent, but by the internal impetus that has 
been initially imparted to the body by the external mover. The impetus idea, 
which under the term mayl (inclination) received explicit expression in 
Avicenna’s al-Shija\ is supposed to derive from Philoponus; but the line or 
lines of its transmission to Arabic, and later to Latin, remain unclear (cf. Na?if, 


III. 7 [279-288] 141 

f Ara al-falasifa al-islamiyyin fial-harka'\ Pines, Studies in Arabic Versions of Greek 
Texts and in Mediaeval Science , pp. 394-422, 440—66). I. H. does not here use a 
special term for impetus, but his explicit statement of this important idea is 
unambiguous, though brief. His commentator Kamal al-Dln recalls in this 
connexion the Avicennian mayl — cf. Tanqih , 1, p. 327; but in Bk IV of the 
Optics I. H. himself employs the kalam term xtimdd (effort, endeavour) — cf 
Nazif, aLHasan , pp. 128-32; Sabra, Theories of Light from Descartes to Newton , 
pp. 72-76 and the text quoted in note 14. The whole paragraph has been 
severely compressed in the Latin version: ‘In motu. Si quis enim saepius in 
circuitum voluitur, cum quiescit; putat, quod parietes moveantur. Et est 
quoniam moto vidente, movetur intrinsecus vis visibilis; et licet videns 
steterit, non statim vis visibilis stabit; sed motus eius in videntis quiete durabit; 
et ob hoc motus visarum rerum aestimatio insurgit. Et huius motus exem- 
plum in trocho videmus; quoniam diu post manus moventis quietem volvitur 
trochus. Est etiam infirmitas, in qua videntur patienti omnia volvi’ (R 101:44- 
8; L x 83^6-32; L 2 47 v B49-48 r A5). Though a little less explicit than the Arabic 
original, this paraphrased text should be taken into account in considerations 
of the Arabo-Latin transmission of the idea of impetus. 

[272] 1. ‘dark or dull colour’: lawn qatim munkasif 

[279-288] Concluding Bk III, I. H. asserts that although the errors of vision 
are many they can all be subsumed under those already examined. As for the 
causes of errors, he is convinced that they do not exceed the eight causes 
enumerated in Chapter 3 ([279]). The errors discussed in the preceding 
chapters are, however, those that have a single cause. But errors may be due to 
two or more causes at the same time [280-281]. For example, looking briefly 
from a distance at an object moving slowly across the line of sight, one may 
take the object to be stationary, though the object’s motion would be detected 
if only the distance were made shorter or only the observation extended. In 
this case, then, the perceptual error is due to two causes working in combina- 
tion; it is what I. H. proposes to call a compound error ([280]). This 
observation suggests to I. H. a procedure in which two or more of the causes 
of error C,-C* are simultaneously varied. For example, let the rotary motion 
of a multi-coloured body be apparent to an observer looking at it from a 
distance d, during a time-interval t and under a certain illumination i. The 
object’s motion may still be apparent to the same observer when only one or 
two of these variables are altered ( e.g . when d is lengthened or t shortened), but 
not when all three variables are changed, as when i is lessened in addition to 
increasing d and decreasing t. Had I. H. extended his investigations to include 
cases of compound errors, Bk III of the Optics would have become even longer 
than it is. But, lacking as he does a method for measuring the variables 
involved, it is doubtful that he would have advanced much farther than he has 


142 


Commentary 


in his examination of single variables. Nevertheless, the experimental orienta- 
tion of I. H.’s concepts and procedures is unmistakable. With the addition of 
measurement Bk III would have been indistinguishable in character from a 
modern book in experimental psychology. 


ARABIC-LATIN GLOSSARY 


144 


Glossary 


NOTE ON THE GLOSSARIES 


As explained in the Introduction (sec. VII), the glossaries represent only a selection of 
words and expressions from Books I-II and Chapters 1-2 in Book III. The glossaries 
are not meant to serve as indices, though some references are supplied in the 
Latin-Arabic Glossary. 

Entries in the Arabic-Latin Glossary are arranged by roots of Arabic words and 
according to the order of the Arabic alphabet. The following system of transliteration 
is adopted: 



Arabic-Latin 


14$ 


a.b.d. 

abadan: semper 

a.b. w. 

abu qalamum: amilialmon 
a.t.y. 

ata 'ala: complere 

fa-qad atayna 'ala: iam complevimus 
a.th.r. 

athar: alteratio 
athar: immutatio 
athar: macula 
aththara: operare 

aththara £1 al-hiss: operare in sensum 
aththara £1 al-nafs: inducere 
dispositionem in anima 
ta’thlr: operatio 
mu’aththir: operans 
muta aththir: patiens 

a.j.L 

min ajl: propter 

a.kh.dh. 

akhadha: accipere 
akhadha: opinari 
ittakhadha: accipere 

a.kh.r. 

akhir dhalik al-qutr: ultimum illius 
diametri 

taakhkhur: see taqaddum (under q.d.m.) 
a.d.b. 

adab: versus 

a.d.y. 

ad da: reddere 

a.r.j.w.n. 

arjawam (or urjuwani): rubeus 
a.r.d. 

ard: terra 

a.s.t.w.n. 

ustuwani: columnatus 

a.s.l. 

asl: radix 

asl idrak al-lawn: radix comprehensionis 
coloris 


a.l.f. 

alifa: esse assuefactum 

ma’luf: assuetus 

ta’lif: compositio 

ta’lif al-ajza’: dispositio partium 

ta allafa: componi 

ma ta allafa: quod componitur 

ta alluf: compositio 

muta’allif: compositus 

i’tilaf: consonantia 

i’tilaf: consonoritas 

a.l.m. 

alam: dolor 

alama: inducere dolorem 

a.m.r. 

amr: modus; see under kh.l. w. 
amara: signum 

a.m.l. 

ta ammala: considerare 
ta ammala: inspicere 
ta ammala: intuere 
ta'ammul: consideratio 
ta ammul: consideratio subtilis 
ta’ammul: inspectio 
bi-al-yasir min al-ta’ammul: per 
modicam inspectionem 
ta’ammul: intuitio 
bi-ghayat al-ta’ammul: per finem 
intuitionis 

bi-fadl ta’ammul: per magnam 
intuitionem 

bi-al-yasir min al-ta’ammul: modica 
intuitione 

bi-mujarrad al-ta’ammul: per solam 
intuitionem 

ta’ammul: see idrak bi-al- ta’ammul 

(under d.r.k.) 

ta’ammul: see tafaqqud (under f.q.d.) 
a.n.s. 

insan: homo 

a.n.f. 

anf: nasus 
ista nafa: iterare 

a. w. f. 

afa: laesio 


146 


Glossary 


Arabic-Latin 


147 


a. w.l. 

ala: instrumentum 

alat al-basar: instrumenta visus 

a.w.n. 

an: instans 

al-an alladhi la yanqasim: instans carens 
latitudine 


b.d.\ 

mabda: principium 

ibtida’: principium 

ibtida’ al-hiss: principium sensus 

b.d.l. 

tabaddul: mutatio 

b.d.h. 

badiha: see idrak bi-al-badiha ( under 

d.r.k.) 

bi-al-badiha: primo aspectu 
bi-al-badiha: in primo aspectu 
bi-al-badiha: per phantasiam 
bi-al-badiha: secundum phantasiam 
bi-al-badiha: staam 

b.r.q. 

bariq al-daw’ wa lama-anuh: scintillatio 
lucis 

b.s.t.n. 

bustan: hortus 

b.s.r. 

basar: ocuius 
basar: visus 
basir: visibilis 
ibsar: visio 
ibsar: visus 

mubsar: visibilis; see al-ma'ani al- 
mubsara (under '.n.y.) 
al-mubsar: res visa 

b.t.’. 

musrif al-but’: tardissimus 
batf : tardus 

b-t.l- 

batala: corrumpi 
batala: destrui 
butlan: destructio 


b.'.d. 

bu'd: distantia 
bud: intervallum 
bu e d: remotio 
bu'd: spacium 

'ala bu'd mutafawit: per spatium 
remotum 

min al-bu'd al-mutafawit: a remoto 
min bu'd mutafawit: a remotissimo 
intervallo 
taba ada: elongare 
mutaba id: remotus 

b.gh.l. 

baghl: mulus 

b.q.y. 

baqiya: remanere 
baqiyya: residuum 

b.l.gh. 

balagha: pervenire 

b.y.t. 

bayt: domus 

b.y.d. 

abyad: albus 

al-baydiyya (i.e. al-rutuba al-b.): 
albugineus 

al-rutuba al-baydiyya: humor albugineus 
b.y.n. 

bayan: declaratio 
bayyin: manifestus 

'ala abyan ma yumkin: valde manifeste 
bayyana: declarare 
bayyana: determinate 
tabyin: demonstratio 
bayana: esse asymmetrum 
wa idh qad tabayyana jami' dhalik: et 
cum declarata sint omnia ista 
fa-yatabayyan min hadha al-i'tibar: 
determinabitur ergo ex ista 
experimentatione 

t.r.f. 

tarif: subtilis 

t.m.m. 

tamma: compleri 
tamam wa kamal: perfectio 


th.b.t. 

thabata: figere 

thabata fi al-takhayyul: figurari in 
imaginatione 

thabata fi al-nafs: figurari in anima 
thabit: existens 

thabit 'ala hal wahida: fixus in eodem 
statu 

athbatu fi al-nafs: magis fixus in anima 
thabbata: figere 

th.q.b. 

thaqb: foramen 

th.Lth. 

muthallath: triangulum 
th.m.r. 

thimar: plantes 

th. w.b. 

thawb: pannus 

j.b.h. 

jabha: frons 

j.h.z. 

jahiz: prominens 

j-d.r. 

jidar: paries 

j.r.r. 

al-majarra: stellae galaxiae 
J-r-d. 

mujarrad: solus 

bi-mujarrad al-hiss: sensu spoliato 
bi-mujarrad al-hiss: solo sensu 
mujarrad 'ala infiradih: singularis 

j.r.y. 

jara: currere 

j.z.z. 

juzaza: schedula 

j.z.\ 

juz’: pars 

juz’an ba da juz’: pars post aliam 
juz’an bada juz’: successive 


17 


adrakahu j uz’an j uz an: comprehendit 
ipsam secundum singulas partes 
juz’ min al-zaman: instans temporis 
ajza’ sighar: partes parvae 
juz’i: particularis 

j.s.m. 

jism: corpus 
tajassum: corporeitas 

jfn. 

jafn: palpebra 

j.i.a. 

al-jalidiyya (i.e. al-rutuba al-j.): glacialis 
j.l.y. 

injala: auferri 
injala: discooperiri 

j.m.'. 

jama'a: aggregare 

ijtama a: aggregare 

ijtama'a: congregare 

(ra’y) ijtama'a 'alayh ashab al-ta'alim: 

(opinio) concessa a mathematicis 
ijtima': adiunctio 
ijtima': aggregatio 
ijtima': congregatio 
ijtima' al-sura: congregatio formae 
ijtima' mutafawit: maxima congregatio 
mujtami'a (plural ): congregata 
jami'an: ambo 

j.m.l. 

jumla: totus 

bi-jumlat (al-shay’): secundum se totum 
jumlat al-'ayn: totus ocuius 
bi-al-jumla: generaliter 
bi-al-jumla: universaliter 
jumlat al-suratayn: universum duarum 
formarum 

min jumlat hadha al-naw': collocatur 
sub hoc modo 

idrakan mujmalan: comprehensione larga 
bi-qawl mujmal: universaliter non 
determinate 

j.m.h.r. 

jumhur jumlat al-mubsar: maior pars 
totius rei visae 


L 


148 


Glossary 


Arabic-Latin 


149 


j.n.b. 

janba: latus 

an janbatay (al-shay’): in eius lateribus 
an janba tay al-markaz: duobus lateribus 
centri 

janib: latus 

'an jawanib (al-shay’): in circuitu eius 

j:n.$. 

jins: genus 

j. w.r. 

mujawara: vicinitas 
mujawir: vicinans 

j. w.z. 

jawaza: pertransire 
jawaza: transire 

j. w.f. 

ajwaf: concavus 
tajwif: concavitas 
tajwif al-'asaba al-mushtaraka: 
concavitas nervi communis 

j. w.h.r. 

jawhar: lapis 

jawahir mushifTa: micantes diaphani 


h.j.j. 

ihtajja: ratiocinari 

h.j.b. 

hajib: supercilium 

h.j.r. 

hajar: lapis 

h.j.m. 

hajm: quantitas 

saghir al-hajm: parvae quantitatis 
saghir al-hajm: minimi corporis 
muqtadir al-hajm: alicuius quantitatis 

h.d.b. 

hadaba: convexum 
tahdlb: gibbositas 

h.d.th. 

hadatha: contigi 

(al-shay') alladhi yuhdithuhu ai- 
mubsar ft al-basar: quam facit 
contingere res visa in visu 


h.d.d. 

haddada: determinare 
h.d.s. 

hadasa: aestimare 
hadasa: aestimare vel arguere 
hadasa: cognoscere secundum 
aestimationem 
hads: aestimatio 
hads: argumentatio 

hads: mensuratio qualiscunque non certa 
bi-al-hads: aestimatione 
bi-al-hads: per aestimationem 
bi-al-hads wa al-tayaqqun: per 
argumentationem et certificationem 

h.d.q. 

haddaqa ila: intuere 
haddaqa ila: intueri 
haddaqa ila: ponere pupillam circa 
haddaqa ila: dirigere pupillam ad 
haddaqa ila (al-shay'): pupillam super 
ipsum tenere 
tahdiq: certificare 

h.dh. w. 

muhadhah: oppositio 
h.r.r. 

harrara: aggregare 
harrara: certificare 
harrara: vero modo exponere 
tahrir: see tafsil ( under f.s.i.) 

'ala al-tahrir: secundum veritatem 
idrakan muhaqqaqan ala al-tahrir: vera 
comprehensione et certificata 
fi ghayat al-tahrir: in fme certitudinis 
muharrar: certificatus 
muharrar: subtilis 

fa-inna nuharrir al-da wa: nos vero 
modo exponemus quaestionem 
taharrara: certificari 
yatahaqqaq wa yataharrar: certificatur 

h.r.f. 

huruf al-kitaba: literae 
huruf al-kitaba: scripturae 
huruf al-kitaba: scriptura subtilis 

h.r.k. 

haraka: motus 

harakat al-sayalan: see sayalan (under 

s.y.l.) 


h.r.y. 

taharra: observare 
taharra: praeservare 

h.s.s. 

hiss: sensus 

ibtida' al-hiss: principium sensus 
bi-mujarrad al-hiss: solo sensu 
bi-mujarrad al-hiss: sensu spoliatu 
fi al-hiss: quantum ad sensum 
quwwat al-hiss: virtus sensus 
al-ha$s: membrum sentiens 
al-hass: sensus 
al-hass: sentiens 
al-jism al-hass: corpus sentiens 
al-jism al-hass: sentiens 
al-hass al-akhir: sentiens ultimum 
al-'udw al-hass: membrum sentiens 
al-'udw al-hass: res sentiens 
al-'udw al-hass: sentiens 
hassa: sensus 

hassat al-basar: sensus visus 
hassas: sensibilis 

al-quwwa al-hassasa: virtus sensitiva 
mahsus: sensibilis 

ikhtilaf mahsus: differentia sensibilis 

zamanan mahsusan: tempore aliquanto 

ghayr mahsus: insensibilis 

a hassa: cognoscere 

ahassa: percipere 

ahassa: sentire 

ihsas: sensus 

akhir al-ihsas: ultimus sensus 
bi-mujarrad al-ihsas: solo sensu 

h.s.b. 

yakun bi-hasab: est proportionalis ad 
h.s.n. 

husn: pulchritudo 

fa'ala al-husna: pulchritudinem facere 
mustahsan: pulcher 

h.s.r. 

mahsur: determinatus 
inha sara: determinari 

h.s.l. 

hasala: infigi 
hasala: institui 
hasala: per venire 

hasala fi al-basar: pervenire ad visum 
hasala: statui 

idha hasala: cum fuerit infixa 


husul: perventus 
hasil fi al-nafs: fixus in anima 
hasil fi al-nafs: residens in anima 
al-muhassilun: verificantes 

h.d.r. 

hadir: praesens 

hadir li-l-dhikr: praesens memoriae 

h.f.z. 

hafiza: corde tenere 
hafiza: custodire 

li-tahfaza 'alayha (i.e. 'ala al-jalidiyya) 
surataha: ita ut eius (i.e. glacialis) natura 
sit custodita 

h.q.q. 

haqiqa: veritas 

haqiqat al-mubsar: veritas rei visae 
haqqaqa: certificare 
tahqiq: certificatio 
tahqiq: certitudo 

'ala al-tahqiq: secundum veritatem 
'ala al-tahqiq: vere 
fi ghayat al-tahqiq: in fine certitudinis 
muhaqqaq: certificatus 
muhaqqaq: certus 
muhaqqaq: verificatus 
muhaqqaq: verus 

idrakan muhaqqaqan 'ala al-tahrir: vera 
comprehensione et certificata 
tahaqqaqa: certificare 
tahaqqaqa: certificari 
tahaqqaqa: verificari 
yatahaqqaq wa yataharrar: certificatur . 
ashaddu tahaqquqan: magis certificatus 
ashaddu tahaqquqan: manifestior 

h.k.m. 

hakama: iudicare 

h.m.r. 

ahmar: rubeus 

h.m.l. 

hamil: deferens 

al-hawa’ al-hamil li-l-sura: aer deferens 
formam 

ihtamala: licere 

yuhtamal an yuqal: licet dicere 

h.n.y. 

inhina’: declinatio 
inhina': gyratio 


150 


Glossary 


Arabic-Latin 


inhina*: incurvatio 
munhanin: curvus 
munhanin: gyratur 

h. w.j. 

haja: indigentia 
ihtaja: indigere 

h. w.z. 

haza: comprehendere 

al-juz’ alladhi yahuzuhu al-makhrut: 

pars quam comprehendit pyramis 
haza: discinguere 

fi al-hawa’ alladhi yahuzuhu hadha al- 
makhrut: in aere quam distinguit ipsa 
pyramis 

h. w.t. 

ahata: continere 

(ashkal) ihatatuha mutasawiya: (esse) 
isoperimetrorum 
muhit: circundans 

h. w.l. 

hal: dispositio 

'ala tasarif al-ahwal: in omnibus 
dispositionibus 

'ala tasarif al-ahwal: secundum omnes 
dispositiones 

'ala kila al-halayn: secundum utramlibet 
dispositionem 

fi akthar al-ahwal: in maiori parte 

fi tilka al-hal: in hoc statu 

fi tilka al-hal: in ilia dispositione 

fi tilka al-hal: in illo situ 

fi tilka al-hal: in illo statu 

fi hal al-ibsar: apud visionem 

fi hal al-muqabala: apud oppositionem 

fi al-hal: statim 

fi al-hala al-ula: in prima vice 

li-halatayn: propter duas causas 

li-halatayn: duabus de causis 

min hadhihi al-hal: ex hac dispositione 

muhal: falsum 

istihala: alteratio 

ra’y mustahil: opinio falsa 

h.y.y. 

hayawaniyya: animalitas 
kh.r.j. 

kharaja: exire 
kharij: exeuns 


kharij 'an: extra 

kharij 'an al-i'tidal: extra mediocritatem 
akhraja: extrahere 

kh.r.t. 

makhrut: pyramis 
makhrut al-shu 'a': pyramis radialis 
inkhirat: pyramidalitas 
inkhirat: pyramidatio 
'ala inkhiratin wa ittisa'in: secundum 
pyramidalitatem et amplificationem 
mawdi' inkhirat al-'asabatayn: locus 
pyramidationis duorum nervorum 
munkharit: pyramidalis 
munkharitan: quasi pyramidaliter 

kh.r.q. 

wa-l-nakhriq . . . kharqan mustadiran: 

fiat cavatura . . . concavitate rotunda 

kh.sh.b. 

khashaba: lignum 

kh.sh.n. 

khashin: asper 
khushuna: aspentas 

kh.s.s. 

khassa: appropriari 
(al-sura al-juz’iyya) allati takhussu 
shakhsa (al-shay’): appropriatur suo 
individuo 

al-ma'ani allati takhussu hay’at al- 
insan: intentiones quae appropriantur 
formae ho minis 
khassa: proprietas 

min khassat al-daw’: ex proprietate lucis 
makhsus: determinatus 
makhsus: proprius 
ikhtassa: appropriari 
ikhtassa: distingui 
ta khassa sa: appropinquari 
takhassasa: appropriari 
mutakhassis: appropriatus 
al-basar mutakhassis bi-qabul al-suwar: 
visus recipit formas proprie 

kh.d.r. 

khudra: viriditas 

akhdar zar'i: color viridis segetalis 
akhdar zinjari: viridis myrti [sic] 
akhdar fustuqt: viridis levistici 


151 


kh.t.t. 

khatt: linea 

khatt mu tarid: linea lata 
khatt mu'tarid: linea posita in latitudine 
khatt mu'tarid: linea recta in latitudine 
khutut al-shu'a': lineae radiales 
khatt: scriptura 
khatt: sculptura 

khatt daqiq: sculpturae et scripturae 
subtiles 

takhtit: lineatio 

takhtit aw ghudun aw wushum aw 
ajza’ sighar: lineatio aut picturae aut 
partes parvae 

takhtit al-wajh: figura faciei 
takhtit al-wajh: lineatio faciei 

kh.f.f. 

khafif: levis 
khafif: rarus 

khafif: see ghisha’ (under gh.sh.y.) 

kh.f.d. 

munkhafid: inferius 

kh.f.y. 

khafiya: latere 

khafiya ‘an al-basar: non comprehenditur 
a visu 

khafi: latens 
khafi: occultus 
athar khafiyya: occulta 
akhfa: occultare 

kh.l.f. 

mukhalif: diversus 

ikhtalafa: diversari 

ikhtalafa: diversificari 

ikhtilaf: differentia 

ikhtilaf: diversitas 

ikhtilaf: inaequalitas 

ikhtilaf mutafawit: maxima differentia 

ikhtilaf mahsus: differentia sensibilis 

mukhtalif: diversus 

kh.l.q. 

akhliq bi-an yakuna: dignum est 
akhliq bi-an yakuna: dignius est 

kh.l.w. 

laysa yakhlu min ahad amrayn: non 

potest evadere ab altero duorum 
modorum 


kh.m.r. 

khamri: vinosus 

al-kuhli wa al-khamri wa al-misanni: 

viriditas profunda et fuscitas 

kh.m.l. 

khaml: attritio 

kh.y.L 

takhayyala: imaginare 
takhayyul: imaginatio 
mutakhayyal: conceptus 

d.b.b. 

dabba: animal 

d.kh.l. 

dakhala tahta: collocari 
yadkhulu tahta al-tartib: collocatur sub 
ordinatione 
dakhil: interior 

mutadakhilan: se mutuo penetrantes 

d.kh.n. 

dukhan: fumus 

d.r.k. 

adraka: comprehendere 
idrak: apprehensio 
idrak: comprehensio 
idrak bi-al-istidlal: comprehensio per 
rationem 

idrak bi-al-badiha: comprehensio per 
primum aspectum 
idrak bi-al-badiha: comprehensio 
superficialis 

idrak bi-al-badiha: comprehensio 
superficialis quae est in primo aspectu 
idrak bi-al-ta’ammul: comprehensio per 
intuitionem 

idrak bi-al-ta’ammul: comprehensio 
quae est per intuitionem 
idrak bi-al-ta’ammul ma'a taqaddum 
al-ma'rifa: comprehensio per 
intuitionem cum scientia praecedente 
idrak bi-mujarrad al-ta’ammul: 

comprehensio sola intuitione 
idrakan mutayaqqanan: vera 
comprehensione 

idrakan mujmalan: comprehensione larga 
idrakan mujmalan: comprehensione 
qualicunque 


152 


Glossary 


Arabic-Latin 


i53 


idrakan muhaqqaqan 'ala al-tahrir: vera 
comprehensione et certificata 

d.'.w. 

da'wa: quaestio 

d.f.\ 

daf' a tan wahidatan: simul 
dafa'a: prohibere 

d-q.q- 

diqqa: gracilitas 

diqqat al-anf: subtilitas nasi 

fi ghayat al-diqqa: in fine gracilitatis 

daqiq: gracilis 

daqiq: subtilis 

al-maani al-daqiqa: incentiones subtiles 
d.k.n. 

(sibgh) adkan: (color) fuscus 
d.1.1. 

dalla: significare 

alladhi yadullu 'ala anna: sigmficatio 
super hoc est 

alladhi yadullu 'ala: significado super hoc 
est 

dalla dhalika 'ala anna: est signum quod 
dalil: argumentum 
dalil: significado 

minima yadullu dalilan wadihan: 

significado manifesta est 
istadalla: arguere 
istadalla: cognoscere 
yastadillu 'ala miqdar al-bu'd bi- 
miqdar al-'izam: accipit 
significationem super quantitatem 
remotionis ex quantitate magnitudinis 
yastadillu 'ala miqdar al-'izam: accipit 
significationem super quantitatem 
magnitudinis 
istidlal: argumentatio 
istidlal: ratio 
istidlal: signatio 
istidlal: significado 
istidlal: see qiyas ( under q.y.s.) 
bi-al-istidlal: per significationem 

d.m.gh. 

dimagh: cerebrum 

d. w.r. 

dawra: revolutio 
da’ira: circulus 


istidara: circumgyrado 
istidara: rotunditas 
mustadir: rotundus 

d.w.m. 

ma dama: dum 
da’iman: semper 
duwwama: trochus 


dh.k.r. 

dhakara: meminisse 
dhikr: memoratio 

hadir li-l-dhikr: praesens memoriae 
dhikran sahihan: vera memoratione 
tadhakkur: rememorado 

dh.h.b. 

madhhab: opinio 

dh.r.'. 

dhira': cubitum 

dh. w. 

min dhatih: per se 

r.’.s. 

ra’s: vertex 

ra’s al-malchrut: vertex pyramidis 

ra’a: opinari 
ra’a: percipere 
ra'a: videre 
ra’y: opinio 
mir’ah: speculum 

r.b.b. 

rubba-ma: fere 
rubba-ma: fortasse 
rubba-ma: forte 

r.b.'. 

dhu al-arba : quadrupes 
murabba': quadrilaterus 
shakl murabba': quadrilaterum 
shakl murabba': quadratum 

r.t.b. 

rattaba: ordinare 
tartib: ordinado 
tartib: ordo 


r.j.'. 

raja'a: revertere 

r.j.l. 

rijl: pes 

z.j.j. 

al-zujaj al-mardud: vitrum quasi 
frustatum 

al-zujajiyya (i.e. al-rutuba al-z.): humor 
vitreus 

r.d.d. 

radda: vertere 

z.r.'. 

zar'i: viridis 

r.d.d. 

mar dud: frustatus 

z.r.q. 

azraq: viridis [tic] 

r.t.b. 

rattaba: humefacere 
rutuba: humor 
ratb: humidus 

r.f.'. 

rafa'a: auferre 
rafa'a: elevare 
murtafi: superius 

z.m.n. 

zaman: temp us 

'ala marr al- zaman: secundum transitum 
temporis 

bi-murur al-zaman: secundum transitum 
temporis 

fi zaman lahu qadr: in tempore alicuius 
quantitads 

fi zaman yasir: in tempore parvo 

r.q.q. 

riqqa: tenuitas 
raqiq: tenuis 

lawn raqiq: color subdlis 

z.n.j.r. 

zinjari: see akhdar zinjari (under kh.d.r.) 

z.h.r. 

al-azhar wa al-anwar: flores 

r.k.b. 

tarkib al-basar: dispositio oculi 
murakkab: componitur 
murakkab: compositus 

z.w.l. 

zala: auferri 
la yazal: non cessare 

r.k.z. 

markaz: centrum 

z.w.y. 

zawiya: angulus 

r. w.h. 

ruh: spiritus 

al-ruh al-basira: spiritus visibilis 

z.y.d. 

bi-al-ziyada wa al-nuqsan: secundum 
magis et minus 

r.w.d. 

arada: velle 

z.y.n. 

tazayin: see nuqush wa tazayin ( under 

n.q.sh.) 

r.w.d. 

riyad: plantae 
riyad: viridia 

r.y.h. 

rayhan: myrtus 

s.t.r. 

satara: cooperire 
satir: obturans 
yastatir: esse coopertum 
mustatir: obturatus 

r.y.sh. 

risha: penna 

s.kh.f. 

sakhif: rarus 


154 


Glossary 


Arabic-Latin 


155 


s.r.j. 

siraj: candela 

s.r.\ 

sur'a: velocitas 

fi ghayat al-sur'a: valde velox 
s.r.f. 

musrif al-but*: tardissimus 

s.d.d. 

sadda: oppilatio 

s.t.h. 

sath: superficies 
tastih: superficies 
musattah: planus 

s.f.r. 

musfir: albedinis debilis 
s.k.n. 

sukun: quies 

s.l.m. 

saiama: salus 

s.m.m. 

masamm: pori 

masamm: see wushum (under w.sh.m.) 
s.m.t. 

samt: verticatio 

samt al-makhrut: verticatio pyramidis 
samt al-muwajaha: verticatio facialis 
r ala al-samt al-mumtadd: in longitudine 
extensa 

'ala samt wahid: super unam 
verticationem 

samt: see waqar (under w.q.r.) 
sumut: lineae rectae 
samata: respicere 
musamit: in verticatione 
musamit: respiciens 
musamit li-l-bu'd: quod respicit 
remotionem 

musamit li-l-tafarruq: respiciens ^ 
distantiam 

s.m.k. 

sumk: spissitudo 


s.h.l. 

suhula: levitas 

li-suhulat ta’thir al-adwa’ al-da ifa: 

propter levitatem operationum lucium 
debilium 

s.h.m. 

sahm: axis 

sahm al-makhrut: axis pyramidis 
sahm mushtarak: axis communis 

s. w.d. 

aswad: niger 

s. w.f. 

masafa: spatium 

masafa mutarida: spatium latum 
s.w.y. 

siwa: praeter 

ma siwa: praeter 

tasawin: aequalitas 

musawin: aequalis 

(adla') mutasawiya: (latera) aequalia 

istiwa’: aequalitas 

istiwa’: planities 

s.y.l. 

sayalan: liquiditas 

harakat al-sayalan: motus liquiditatis 


sh.b.r. 

shibr: palmus 

sh.b.h. 

shabah: assimilatio 

kathir al-shabah: multae assimilatioms 
qalil al-shabah: paucae assimilationis 
shabih: similis 
shabbaha: assimilare 
tashbih: assimilatio 
tashabbuh: assimilatio 
tashabuh: consimilitudo 
fi ghayat al-tashabuh: consimilis valde 
(wad*) mutashabih: (situs, positio) 
consimilis 

(sath) mutashabih al-tartib: (superficies) 
consimilis ordinatioms 
mutashabih al-sura: consimilis formae 
mutashabih fi al-bu'd: consimilis in 
remotione 
ishtabaha: latere 
ishtibah: dubitatio 


mushtabih: non manifestus 
mushtabih: dubitabilis 
alwan mushtabiha: colores non manifesti 
ghayr mushtabih: indubitabilis 
mushtabih ghayr muhaqqaq: non 
certificatus 

sh.h.m. 

shahma: pinguedo 

sh.kh.s. 

shakhs: individuum 
bi-al-shakhs: individualiter 
bi-al-shakhs: secundum individuum 
shakhsiyyat al-mubsar: individuitas rei 
visae 

shukhus: praeeminentia 
shukhus: prominentia 
shakhis: prominens 

al-ajza 1 al-shakhisa: partes prominentes 
sh.d.d. 

bi-al-ashadd wa al-ad'af: secundum 
magis et minus 

sh.r.b. 

sharab khamri: vinum 
sh.r.h. 

sharaha: declarare 
sharh: expositio 

sh.r.t. 

shart: conditio 

sh.r.q. 

mushriq (said of colour): scintillans 
lawn mushriq: color scintillans 
ashraqa: oriri 

sh.r.k. 

mushtarak: communis 
sh.z.y. 

shaziyya: filium 

shazaya al-'asab: filia nervorum 

sh.V. 

shu'a‘: radius 

ashab al-shu'a': ponentes radios exire a 
visu 


sh.'.th. 

tash'ith: diversitas 
tash'Ith: mutatio 
tasha“uth: mutatio 

sh.'.r. 

sha'r: capilli 

sh.f. f. 

shafif: diaphanitas 

bi-ma fiha min al-shafif: cum eo quod 
est in eo de diaphamtate 
da if al-shafif: debilis diaphanitatis 
fi ghayat al-shafif: in fine diaphanitatis 
mushiff: diaphanus 
al-jism al-mushiff: corpus diaphanum 

sh.f.h. 

shafa: labium 

sh.q.q. 

inshaqqa: crescere 

sh.k.l. 

shakl: figura 
shakl: figuratio 
tashakkala: figurari 
tashakkala: formari 
tashakkul: figuratio 
matashakkil: figuratus 
mutashakkil fi al-takhayyul: figuratus in 
imaginationem 

sh.m.'. 

sham': cera 

shumu: see masabih (under s.b.h.) 
sh.m.l. 

ishtamala: continere 

sh.h.d. 

shahada: percipere 
s ha ha da: videre 
mushahada: perceptio 
mushahada: visio 

sh.h.l. 

ashhal: glaucus 

sh. w.h. 

mushawwah: monstruosus 



156 


Arabic-Latin 


i57 


sh.y.n. 

shana: turpem facere 
shana: turpem reddere 

s.b.h. 

al-masabih wa al-shumu': candelae 
s.b.\ 

isba': digitus 

s.b.gh. 

sabagha: immutare 
sabagha: intingere 
sabagha: tingere 
sibgh: color 

sibgh adkan: color fuscus 
sibgh: tinctura 
sibgh qawi: tinctura fortis 
asbagh mushriqa: tincturae lucidae 
al-alwan wa al-asbagh: colores et 
tincturae 

s.h.h. 

sahha: posse 

'ala ghayat ma yasihh: in fine veritatis 
sahih: rectus 

s.h.b. 

sahiba: associari 

ashab al-ta'alim: mathematici 

s.d.r. 

sadara: exire 
sadr: prooemium 

s.d.f. 

sadafa: concha 

s.d.q. 

yakunu as da q a ru’yatan: est certioris 
visionis 

s.r.f. 

sarafa al-basara: visum declinare 
insarafa: recessere 
insiraf: recessus 

s.gh.r. 

sighar: parvitas 

fi zaman fi ghayat al-sighar: in tempore 
valde parvo 
saghir: parvus 

saghir al-hajm: parvae quantitatis 


Glossary 

saghir al-hajm: minimi corporis 
tasaghur: diminutio 

s.f.q. 

safiq: densus 
safiq: spissus 

s.f.y. 

safa 1 (said of colour): claritas 
safin: clarus 

s.q.l. 

saqil: tersus 

s.w.b. 

asaba: veritatem invenire 
s. w.r. 

sura: forma 

sura juz’iyya: forma particularis 
sura mahsusa: forma sensibilis 
surat (al-shay’) allati takhussuhu: forma 
propria 

al-sura al-kulliyya allati takhussu naw a 
(al-shay’): universalis forma speciei 
sura: natura 

s.y.r. 

sara: effici 

sara ila: pervenire ad 
sara ila: venire ad 


d.b.t. 

indabata: retmere 

d.'.f. 

da'f: debilitas 
ad‘af: latentior 

ad'af: see ashadd (under sh.d.d.) 
da'if: debilis 

da'if al-daw’: debilis lucis 
kana da'if al-nisba jiddan: quod est 
minimae proportionis 
da'if al-nisba jiddan ila: proportionis 
minimae respectu 

d.L'. 

dil': latus 

shakl kathir al-adla': figura multorum 
laterum 

mutasawi al-adla': aequalium laterum 
shakl mudalla': figura laterata 


d.m.n. 

damina: promittere 

d.w.’. 

daw’: lux 

daw’ dhati: lux essentialis 
daw’: lumen 

daw* 'aradi: lumen accidentale 
mudf : illuminatus 

mudf min dhatih: illuminatus per se 
mudi’: luminosus 
ida’a: illuminatio 

d.y.q. 

daqa: angustari 
dayyiq: strictus 

tafarruq dayyiq: distinctio stricta 
t.b.'. 

tabi'a: natura 
matbu': natus 

matbu' 'ala al-qiyas: natus est ad 
arguendum 

t.b.q. 

tabaqa: tunica 
intabaqa: supponi 
intabaqa: superponi 
muntabiq: superpositus 

t.r.f. 

taraf: extremitas 
taraf: extremum 

atraf al-huruf: extrema literarum 
t.f.l. 

tufuliyya: pueritia 

t.l.b. 

talaba: quaerere 

t.m.n. 

tatamun al-jabha: planities frontis 
t.w.s. 

taw us: pavo 

t.w.l. 

tul: longitudo 

fi al-tul: secundum longitudinem 
atala: moran 

atala al-nazar: diu duraverit aspectus 
mustatil: longus 


z.1.1. 

zill: umbra 

z.l.m. 

zulma: obscuritas 
muzlim: obscurus 

z.n.n. 

zanna: aestimare 
zanna: existimare 
maznun: aestimatus 
maznun: opinabilis 

z.h.r. 

zahara: apparere 

zahar a li— 1— hiss: apparere sensui 

zahir: manifestus 

zahir al-basar: pars manifesta oculi 
istazhara al-lawn al-qawi 'ala al-da'if: 

color fortis vincet debilem 
istizhar suwar al-adwa’ al-qawiyya: 

victoria formarum lucis fortis 
mustazhira (said of the form of light’): forte 
vincet 

'.b.r. 

i'tabara: animadvertere 
i'tabara: considerare 
ya'tabiru bi-al-zawiya: considerabit 
angulum 

i'tabara: experimentare 
i'tabara: experiri 
i'tabara: mensurare 
i'tabara: probare 
i'tibar: consideratio 
i'tibar: experientia 
bi-al-qiyas wa al-i'tibar: ratione et 
experientia 

i'tibar: experimentatio 
i'tibaran muharraran: experimentatione 
subtili 

i'tibaran muhaqqaqan: experimentatione 
vera 

fa-min al-i'tibar bi-hadhihi al-ma'ani: 
experimentatione igitur istarum 
intentionum 

mu'tabir: experimentator 
'.d.d. 

'idda: multus 
'adad: numerus 


158 


Glossary 


ArabioLatin 


159 


'.d.l. 

li-anna al-kura a'dal al-ashkal al- 
mujassama: quia magis temperata 
figurarum est sphaerica 
i' tidal: mediocritas 

kharij 'an al-i' tidal: extra mediocritatem 
li-i'tidal al-istidara: quia rotunditas est 
simplicissima figurarum 
mu'tadil: mediocns 

'.d.m. 

adam: privatio 

adam al-daw’: privatio lucis 

mutaarrij: tortuosus 

'.r.d. 

arada: accidere 
arad: accidens 

bi-tariq al-arad: accidentaliter 
bi-tanq al- arad: per viam accidentalem 
aradi: accidentalis 
'ard: latitudo 

khatt la 'arda lahu: linea carens Iatitudine 

fi al-'ard: secundum latitudinem 

'arada: contradicere 

mutarid: latus 

khatt mu'tarid: linea lata 

khatt mu'tarid: linea posita in Iatitudine 

khatt mu'tarid: linea recta in Iatitudine 

masafa mu'tarida: spatium latum 

*.r.f. 

arafa: cognoscere 
ma'rifa: cognitio 
bi-taqaddum al-ma'rifa: per 
cognitionem antecedentem 
bi-al-ma'rifa: per cognitionem 
bi-al-ma'rifa wa bi-taqaddum al- 
ma'rifa: per cognitionem et per 
scientiam antecedentem 
taqaddum al-ma'rifa: cognitio 
praecedens 

fi hal al-ma'rifa: apud cognitionem 
quwwat al-ma'rifa: virtus cognitionis 
ma'rifa bi-al-naw': cognitio speciei 
ma'rifa: scientia 

taqaddum al-ma'rifa: scientia antecedens 
ma'a taqaddum al-ma'rifa: cum scientia 
praecedente 


•?b. 

'asaba: nervus 

'asaba mushtaraka: nervus communis 
'.d.l. 

'adala: lacertus 

'.d. w. 

'udw: membrum 

al-'udw al-hass: membrum sentiens 
al-'udw al-hass: res sentiens 

\t.f. 

in'atafa: obliquari 
in atafa: refringi 
in'itaf: obliquatio 

in'itaf sath al-jism: obliquatio superficiei 
corporis 
in'itaf: refractio 
mun'atif: obliquans 
mun'atif: obliquus 

mun'atif ila jihat al-taba'ud: obliquus ad 
locum remotionis 
mun'atif: refractus 
khutut mun'atifa: lineae refractae 

'.z.m. 

azm: os 

'izam: magnitudo 
a'zam: maior 
ta'azum: augmentatio 

'.q.d. 

i'taqada: opinari 

'.q.l. 

'aql: intellectus 

bi-mujarrad al- aql: solo intellectu 
'.k.s. 

bi-al-'aks: contrarie 
in'ikas: reflectio 
in'ikas ( reversion ): conversio 
mun'akis: contrarius 
mun'akis (inverted): conversus 

U.l. 

ilia: causa 

li-hadhihi al-'illa: propter hoc 
li-hadhihi al-'illa: propter istam causam 
illat dhalik annahu: causa est quia 
al-'illa fi dhalik anna: causa lllius est 
al-'illa fi dhalik anna: causa in hoc est 


M.m. 

alima: cognoscere 
'alima: percipere 
'alima: scire 
'ilm: scientia 

bi-taqaddum al-'ilm: per scientiam 
antecedentem 
'ilm: sermo 

'ilm awwal: propositio prima 
'ulum uwal: propositiones primae 
ashab al-ta'allm: mathematici 

'.m.d. 

amud: perpendicularis 
i'tamada: intendere 

'.m.q. 

umq: profunditas 
umq: profundum 

\m.l. 

ta'ammul: labor 

'.n.b. 

'inabiyya (i.e. al-tabaqa al-'.): uvea 
■n.y. 

ma na: forma 

al-ma'ani al-qa’ima fi al-nafs wa hadira 
li-l-dhikr: formae existentes in amma et 
praesentes memoriae 
ma na: hoc 
hadha al-ma'na: hoc 
ma'na: intentio 

al-ma'ani al-juz’iyya: intentiones 
particulares 

al-ma'ani al-khafiyya: intentiones 
occultae 

al-ma'ani al-latifa: intentiones sub tiles 
al-ma'ani al-latifa: subtilia 
al-ma'ani al-mubsara: intentiones 
visibiles 
ma'na: res 

al-ma'ani al-latifa: res subtiles 
al-ma'ani al-mubsara: res visibiles 
jami e al-ma'ani: omnia 
jami' hadhihi al-ma'ani: omnia ista 
hadha al-ma'na: illud 
hadha al-ma'na: istud 
li-ma nan min kharij: per aliquid 
extrinsecum 

'.h.d. 

'ahida: consuescere 


\w.d. 

'ada: reverti 
'ada: consuetudo 
a'ada: revertere 
i'tiyad: assuetudo 

'.w.q. 

'aqa: impedire 
'aqa: prohibere 
'a’iq: impedimentum 

'.w.L 

'awwala: sustentari 
mu'awwal: sustentatio 

'.y.n. 

'ayn: oculus 

jumlat al-'ayn: totus oculus 

mu'ayyan: individuus 

mubsar mu'ayyan: res visa indi vidua 

'.n.d. 

inda: apud 

inda hassat al-basar: apud visum 

'.n.k.b.t. 

ankabutiyya (i.e. al-tabaqa al-'): aranea 
gh-b.r. 

ghubar: pulvis 

gh.r.b. 

gharib: extraneus 

gh.d.r. 

mughdir: obscurus 

gh.sh.y. 

ghisha : testa 

ghisha 1 fi ghayat al-khiffa: tela valde rara 
gh.d.n. 

ghudun: rugae 

gh.l.t. 

ghalita: errare 
ghalita: decipi 
ghalat: error 
ghalit: deceptus 

aghlat al-basar: deceptiones visus 



1 60 

gh.l.z. 

ghilaz: spissitudo 
ba d al-ghilaz: aliqua spissitudo 
bi-ma fiha min al-ghilaz: cum eo quod 
est ex eo de spissitudine 
ghilaz yasir: modica spissitudo 
ghaliz: crassus 

gh.m.d. 

ghammada: claudere 

gh.w.r. 

ghu’ur: profundatio 
ghu’ur: profunditas 
gha’ir: profundus 
ajza’ gha’ira: partes profundae 

gh.y.y. 

ghaya: finis 

fi ghayat al-da'f: in fine debilitatis 
ghaya: maximum 
fi al-ghaya: valde 

gh.y.b. 

ghaba: recedere 
ghaba: separari 

gh.y.r. 

ghayr al-akhar: diversus ab altero 
taghayyara: diversari 
taghayyur: alteratio 
taghayyur: mutatio 
mutaghayyir: transmutabilis 

f.t.h. 

fata ha: aperire 

f.r.d. 

mufrad: simplex 
munfaridan: per se 
munfaridan: singulariter 

f.r.s. 

faras: equus 

f.r.t. 

mufrit fi al-quwwa: remotus in 
fortitudine 

bi-al-ifrat: extranea fortitudine 
f.r.q. 

farraqa: distinguere 

mawdi' al-tafriq: locus distinctionis 


Glossary 

tafarruq: discretio 
tafarruq: discretio et separatio 
tafarruq: distinctio 
tafarruq fasih wa fihi sa'a: distinctio 
ampla 

tafarruq: distantia 
tafarruq: divisio 
mutafarriq: separatus 
al-kawakib al-mutafarriqa: stellae 
separatae 

al-mubsarat al-mutafarriqa: res visae 
distinctae 

al-mubsarat al-mutafarriqa: visibilia 
distantia ab invicem 
al-mubsarat al-mutafarriqa: visibilia 
distincta 

f.s.t.q. 

fustuqi: see akhdar (under kh.d.r.) 

f.s.h. 

fasih: am plus 

fasih al-aqtar: magnae quantitatis 
fasih al-aqtar: maximarum diametrorum 

f.s.d. 

fasad: corruptio 

f.s.l. 

fasala (to cut off): distinguere 
fasl: opus 

fasl mushtarak: differentia communis 
fassala: distinguere 
fassala: dividere 
fassala: secare 
tafsil: distinctio 
infasala: distmgui 
infasala bi-al-makhrut: distingui a 
pyramide 

(al-juz 1 alladhi) infasala bi-al-makhrut: 

(pars) distincta per pyramidem 
jisman munfasilan: duo corpora distincta 
jisman ghayr munfasilayn: duo corpora 
non diversa 

f.d.l. 

tafadul: augmentum 
tafadul: excessus 

f.d.w. 

fa da’: vacuitas 


Arabic-Latin 


161 


f.t.r. 

htra: natura 

fit rat al-'aql: natura intellectus 
bi-fitrat al-'aql: per naturam et 
intellectum 

la bi-fitrat al-'aql: non per naturam 
intellectus 

f.t.s. 

fatasa fi al-anf: simitas in naso 

f.U. 

fa ala zawiyatan: angulum facere 
fa'ala al-husna: pulchritudinem facere 
fi e l: actio 
infa ala: pati 
infi'al: passio 

f. q.d. 

tafaqqada: intuere 
tafaqqud: consideratio 
tafaqqud: intuitio 
tafaqqud: intuitio subtilis 
al-tafaqqud wa al-ta’ammul: intuitio 

f. m. 

fam: os 

f.h.m. 

fahima: intelligere 
fahm: intellectus 
mafhum: intelligibilis 

f.w.t. 

tafawut: differentia 
tafawut: diversitas 
tafawut lahu qadr: magnus excessus 
tafawut musrif: magna diversitas 
tafawut musrif: maxima diversitas 
tafawut: excessus 
tafawut: extraneitas 
mutafawit: extraneus 
ikhtilaf mutafawit: diversitas extranea 
bu'd mutafawit: remotio valde extranea 
mutafawit: magnus 
mutafawit: maximus 
ikhtilaf mutafawit: maxima differentia 
mutafawit: multus 
'ala bu'd mutafawit: in ultimo spatii 
'ala bu'd mutafawit: per spatium 
remotum 

min al-bu'd al-ba'id al-mutafawit: in 

maxima remotione 

min al-bu'd al-mutafawit: a remoto 


min al-bu'd al-mutafawit: a remotissimo 
min bu'd mutafawit: a remotissimo 
intervallo 


q.b.h. 

qubh: turpitudo 

fi ghayat al-qubh: in fine turpitudinis 
qabih: foedus 
qabth: turpis 
qabbaha: turpem facere 

q.b.l. 

qabila: recipere 
qabul: receptio 

qabula ihsasin: secundum receptionem 
sensus 

qabula istihalatin: receptione ad 
alterandum 

qabula ta’diyatin: receptione ad 
reddendum 
min qabl: superius 
qabala: opponere 
qabala: opponi 
qabala: esse oppositum 
muqabala: oppositio 
muqabil: oppositus 

q.d.r. 

qadr: quantitas 
lahu qadr: alicuius quantitatis 
juz’ lahu qadr: pars alicuius quantitatis 
nuqta la qadra laha: punctum carens 
quantitate 
miqdar: mensura 
miqdar: quantitas 
muqtadir: alicuius quantitatis 
juz’ muqtadir: pars alicuius quantitatis 
muqtadir al-hajm: alicuius quantitatis 
kura muqtadira: sphaera alicuius bonae 
quantitatis 

masafa muqtadira: spatium aliquantulum 
taqaddara: mensurari 

q.d.m. 

qadam: pes 

fi-ma taqaddama: in praeteritis 
taqaddum al-ma'rifa: see ma'rifa ( under 

•r.f.) 

fi-al-taqaddum wa al-ta’akhkhur: 

secundum accessionem et remotionem 
muqaddam: anterior 
fi muqaddam al-'inabiyya: in anteriori 
uveae 


162 


Glossary 


Arabic-Latin 


163 


muqaddama: positio 
li-zuhur muqaddamatiha: per 

manifestationem positionum illarum 
muqaddama: propositio 
muqaddama juz’iyya: propositio minor 
particularis 

muqaddama kulliyya: propositio 
universalis 

q.r.r. 

qarrara: declarare 
istaqarrra: acquiescere 
istaqarra: aggregari 
istaqarra: quiescere 
mustaqirr f! al-takhayyul: quietus in 
imaginatione 

q.r.\ 

istaqra’a: considerare 
istaqra’a bi-al-ta’ammul: considerare per 
intuitionem 
istaqra’a: inducere 
istaqra’a: inspicere 
istiqra’: consideratio 
istiqra’: distinctio 
istiqra’: inductio 

q.r.b. 

qarib: propinquus 
qariban: prope 
taqarub: propinquitas 
mutaqarib al-aqtar: propinquorum 
diametrorum 

(shakhsan) mutaqariban: (duo individua) 
propinqua 

(alwan) mutaqariba: colores consimiles 
q.r.t.s. 

qirtas: pergamenum 

q.r.n. 

qurna II al-hajib: arcualitas in superciliis 
qurnat al-anf: cornu nasi 
al-qarniyya: cornea 
iqtiran: coniunctio 
iqtiran wa ta’alluf: compositio et 
coniugatio 

muqtarina (f.pl. ): compositae 
q.s.m. 

qism: modus 
qism: pars 


q.s.s. 

iqtassa: narrare 

q.s.d. 

qasd: intentio 

min ghayr qasd: sine intentione 
q.s.r. 

qusur quwwat al-hiss: debilitas sensus 
q.t.r. 

qutr: diametrus 

fasih al-aqtar: maximorum diametrorum 
mutasawi al-aqtar: aequalium 
diametrorum 

mukhtaiif al-aqtar: inaequalium 
diametrorum 

nisf al-qutr: medietas diametri 
q.t.\ 

qataa: abscidere 
qata a: pertransire 
qata a: secare 
qit'a: portio 
qati': secans 
taqatu : sectio 

(khutut) mutaqatia: (lineae) secantes 
inqita' al-samt: destructio lineae 
inqita' al-shafif: destructio diaphanitatis 

q.'.d. 

qa'ida: basis 

q-'r- 

taq'ir: concavitas 

muqa'ar al- f azm: concavum ossis 
q.1.1. 

qalla ma: raro 
qalil: rarus 

qalilan qaiilan: paulatim et paulatim 
q.m/. 

qim': instrumentum ponendi vinum in 
doliis 

q.n/. 

qana a: sufficere in comprehensione 
q.n.w. 

iqtana: acquirere 

qana (m55. qnw) al-anf: simitas nasi 


q. w.s. 

muqawwas: arcualis 

q. w.l. 

qala: dicere 
qawl: sermo 
maqala: liber 

q. w.m. 

qamat (al-insan): corpus (hominis) 
qamat al-insan: quantitas erectionis 
hominis 

qa’im: perpendicularis 
khatt qa’im *ala sath: linea recta elevata 
super superficiem 

qa’imun qiyaman mu tadilan: stans statu 
aequali 

qa’im 'ala al-lawh: positus super tabulam 
taqwim ashkal al-huruf: directio 
figurarum literarum 
fi ghayat al-taqwim: in fine bonae 
dispositionis 
aqama: erigere 
taqawwama: componi 
taqawwama: consistere 
taqawwama: effici 
istiqama: rectitudo 
ala istiqama: recte 

'ala istiqama: secundum rectitudinem 
mustaqim: rectus 

q.w.y. 

quwwa: fortitudo 
quwwa: vigor 

fi al-quwwa wa al-da'f: secundum 
vigorem et debilitatem 
quwwa: virtus 

al-quwwa al-basira: virtus visibilis 
quwwat al-hiss: virtus sensus 
al-quwwa al-hassasa: virtus sensibilis 
al-quwwa al-hassasa: virtus sensitiva 
al-quwwa al-hassasa: virtus sentiens 
al-quwwa al-hassa: virtus sentiens 
al-quwwa al-qabila: virtus recipiens 
quwwat al-ma'rifa: virtus cognitionis 
al-quwwa al-mumayyiza: virtus 
distinctiva 

quwwat al-basar: fortitudo visus 
qawi: fords 

q.y.s. 

qasa: comparare 
qasa: mensurare 
qiyas: argumentatio 


bi-al-qiyas wa al-tamyiz: per 
argumentationem et distinctionem 
qiyas: argumentum 
bi-al-qiyas wa al-istidlal: per 
argumentum et significationem 
qiyas: comparatio 
bi-al-tamyiz wa al-qiyas: per 
distinctionem et comparationem 
bi-qiyas ahadihima bi-al-akhar: per 
comparationem alterius ad alterum 
qiyas: ratio 

bi-al-qiyas wa al-i'tibar: ratione et 
experientia 

bi-al-qiyas wa al-tamyiz: ratione et 
argumentatione 
fi al-qiyas: in ratione 
qiyas: ratiocinatio 

bi-darb min durub al-qiyas: per aliquem 
modorum ratiocinadonis 
bi-al-qiyas ila: in respectu 
qiyasan 'ala al-ajram al-samawiyya: in 
respectu corporum caelestium 
bi-al-qiyas ila: respectu 
bi-al-qiyas ila al-hiss: respectu sensu 
bi-al-qiyas ila al-hiss: quantum ad 
sensum 

min qiyas ba'diha bi-ba'd: respectu 
eorum inter se 
qiyas: syllogismus 

k.t.b. 

kitaba: see huruf al-kitaba ( under h.r.f.) 
katib: scriptor 

k.th.r. 

kathra: muldtudo 
kathir: multus 

shakl kathir al-adla': polygonum 
kathir al-anwa': multimoda 
'ala akthar al-awda: in pluribus 
positionibus 

fi al-akthar: in maion parte 
k.th.f. 

kathafa: spissitudo 
kathif: densus 

kathif: densus non translucens 
k.h.l. 

kuhli: (?) dnctura obscura 

al-kuhli wa al-khamri wa al-misanni: 

viriditas profunda et fuscitas 


18 



Glossary 


Arabic-Latin 


i 6 4 


165 


k.d.r. 

kadir (said of colour): turbidus 

k.r.r. 

karrara: iterare 
takrar: frequentatio 
takrar: iteratio 
ta karrara: reverti 

yatakarrar 'ala al-basar: revertitur ad 
visum 

takarrur: frequentatio 
takarrur: iteratio 

k.r. w. 

kura: sphaera 
kuri: sphaericus 

k.s.b. 

iktisab: acquisitio 

k.s.r. 

daw’ munkasir: lux debilis 

k.s.f 

kasafa: obscurare 

k.sh.f 

kashafa: considerare 
munkashif: discoopertus 

k.f.y. 

kafa: sufficere 

k.1.1. 

kulla-ma: quanto 

sura kulliyya: forma universalis 

k.l.f. 

takalluf: difficultas 
takalluf: labor 

k.m.l. 

kamal: see tamam (under t.m.m.) 

k.w.k.b. 

kawkab: Stella 

k.w.n. 

'ala mithl ma kana: ut prius fecit 
makan: locus 

k.y.f. 

kayfa: quomodo 

kayfa yakun al-ibsar: qualiter fiat visio 


kayfiyya: qualitas 

kayfiyyat al-haraka: qualitas motus 

l.b.s. 

labs: dubium 

la labsa fihi: sine dubium 

la yaqa'u fihi labs: non dubitatur 

iltabasa: admisceri 

iltabasa: dubitari 

iltabasa: latere 

iltibas: latentia 

kana ashadda iltibasan: tanto magis latet 

iltibas: occultatio 

multabis: admixtus 

multabisa ( said of colours): admixti 

multabis: dubitabilis 

ma'nan multabis: mtentio dubitabilis 

l.h.z. 

lahaza: aspicere 

lahaza: considerare 

mulahaza: aspectus 

fi hal al-mulahaza: apud aspectum 

mulahaza: intuitio 

mulahaza: visio 

l.h.q. 

lahiqa: contingere 

l.h.m. 

iltahama: consolidari 
iltiham: consolidate 

da’irat al-iltiham: circulus consolidationis 
al-multahima (i.e. al-tabaqa al-m.): 

consolidativa 

l.z.m. 

lazima: oportere 
lazima: sequi 

yalzam min dhalik: sequitur ex hoc 
lazim li-wad'ih: fixus in suo loco 
lazim li-wad'ih: fixus in suo situ 
lazim fi: sequitur 

l.z.w.r.d. 

lazawardi: caeruleus 
lazawardi: lazuleus 

l.s.q. 

alsaqa: applicare 
multasiq: applicatus 


l.t.kh. 

latakhat: stellae extensae 

l.t.f. 

latif: subtilis 

al-jism al-latif: corpus subtile 
al-ma'ani al-latifa: intentiones subtiles 
latafat al-fam: subtilitas nasi 

l.f.t. 

iltifat: ablatio 

l.q.y. 

iltaqa: concurrere 
iltaqa: coniungere 
iltiqa’: coniunctio 

l.m.s. 

lams: tactus 
mulamasa: contactus 

l.m.'. 

bariq al-daw’ wa lama anuh: scintillatio 
lucis 

1. w.h. 

lawh: tabula 

1. w.z. 

talwiz al-'aynayn: amygdalitas oculorum 
l.w.n. 

lawn: color 

al-lawn bi-ma huwa lawn: color in eo 
quod est color 
lawn qawi: color fortis 
lawn mushriq: color scintillans 
mulawwan: coloratus 

l.y.l. 

layl: nox 

fi sawad al-layl: in nigredine noctis 
fi al-layali al-muzlima: in noctibus 
obscuris 

fi al-layali al-muqmira: in noctibus lunae 

ma 

'ala ma huwa 'alayh (al-shay’): 

secundum quod est 
'ala ma huwa 'alayh (al-shay’): 

secundum suum esse 
'ala khilaf ma huwa 'alayh (al-shay’): 
alio modo ab eo quod est 


al-daw’ bi-ma huwa daw’: lux in eo quod 
est lux 

al-lawn bi-ma huwa lawn: color in eo 
quod est color 
ma’iyya: quidditas 

ma’iyyat al-mubsar: quod est res visa 

m.’.q. 

mimma yali muq al-'ayn: in parte 
lachrymarum oculi 

m.t.n. 

matana: fortitudo 
matin: fortis 

m.th.L 

mithal dhalik: verba gratia 

'ala tariq al-mithal: gratia exempli 

m.d.d. 

muddatan: longo tempore 
imtadda: extendi 
imtadda: generari 

al-sura al-mumtadda: forma extensa 

m.r.r. 

marra: pertransire 
marra: transire 

'ala marr al-zaman: praeterito tempore 
fi awwali marra: pnma vice 
murur: transitus 
istimrar: frequentatio 

m.z.j. 

mumtazij: permixtus 

m.s.s. 

massa: contingere 
mumass: contmgens 
tamass: contiguatio 

(ajsam) mutamassa: (corpora) contigua 

m.s.h. 

masaha: mensurare 
misaha: quantitas 

nuqta la misaha laha: punctum carens 
quantitate 

m.s.k. 

tamasuk: retentio 


1 66 

m.s.n. 

(lawn) misanni: tinctura similis colori 
origani 

(lawn) misanni: see kuhli ( under k.h.l.) 
m.\ 

ma'a dhalik: et tunc 
ma'a dhalik: insuper 
ma'a dhalik: praeterea 
ma'a dhalik: simultotam 
ma'an: simul 

m.k.n. 

mumkin: possibilis 
amkana: posse 

wa qad yumkin an yuqal: et licet dicere 
m.l.s. 

malasa: levitas 
malasa: planities 
amlas: planus 
amlas: planus et aequalis 

m.n.'. 

imtana'a: impossibile esse 
mumtani': impossibilis 

m.y.z. 

mayyaza: distinguere 
tamyiz: distinctio 
al-tamyiz: virtus distinctiva 
bi-al-tamyiz wa al-qiyas: per 
distinctionem et argumentationem 
quwwat al-tamyiz: virtus distinguendi 
ins an mumayyiz: homo distinguens 
al-quwwa al-mumayyiza: virtus 
distinctiva 

tamayyaza: distingui 

m.y.'. 

mai‘: fluxibilis 

m.y.l. 

mala: declinare 
mala: obliquari 
mayl: obliquatio 

yasir al-mayl: modicae obliquationis 

ma’il: declinabilis 

ma’il: declinans 

ma’il: declinans aut obliquus 

mail: inclinatus 

ma’il: obliquans 

ma’il: obliquatus 

ma’il: obliquus 


Glossary 


Arabic-Latin 


167 


ma’il 'ala: obliquus super 
ma’il 'an: declinans a 
ma’il 'an: obliquus a 
mayyala: avertere 


n.b.t. 

nabat: arbores 


n.t.’. 

nutu’ al-jabha: prominentia fronds 
n.d.r. 

nadiran: raro 


n.z.\ 

naza'a: absterrere 
naza'a: auferre 


n.s.b. 

nisba: propordo 
lahu nisba mahsusa: habens 
proportionem sensibilem 
nasaba: proportionem habere 
yunasib . . . wa yubayin (al-shay’a): 
habet proportionem . . . et est 
asymmetrus 

tanasub: proportionalitas 
mutanasib: secundum unam 
proportionem 

mutanasib wa muta’allif: proportionalis 
n.s.y. 

nisyan: oblivio 

n.sh.’. 

fi awwal al-nushu’: in principio 
quiescentiae [sir] hominis 
mabda’ al-nushu’: principium incremend 
mans ha’: incrementum 
mansha’: ortus 


n.sh.r. 

intashara: dilatari 

n.s.b. 

nasaba: erigere 
nusba: situs 

intisab al-qama: erectio corporis 
n.z.r. 

nazara: aspicere 
nazara: considerare 
nazara: inspicere 


nazar: as pectus 
nazir: aspiciens 
nazir: inspiciens 
nazir: respondens 
nazir: similis 

n.'.t. 

na't: narrado 

n.'.m. 

an'ama al-ta’ammul: bene intueri 
n.f.dh. 

nafadha: pertransire 
nafadha: transire 
manfadh: foramen 

n.f.s. 

nafs: anima 

n. f. \ 

manfa'a: utilitas 

n.q.sh. 

naqsh: sculptura 

naqsh daqiq: sculptura subtilis 

nuqush: picturae 

nuqush wa tazayin: picturae et sculpturae 
intaqasha: imprimi 

n.q.s. 

nuqsan: see ziyada ( under z.y.d.) 

n.q.d. 

intaqada: destrui 

n.q.t. 

nuqta: punctum 

nuqta la misaha laha: punctum carens 
quantitate 

n.q.l. 

intaqala: mutare 
intaqala: transferri 

n.q.y. 

naqi al-bayad: clare albus 
(jism) naqi al-bayad: (corpus) mundum 
album 

(jism abyad) naqi al-bayad: (corpus 
album) clare albedinis 

n.m.sh. 

namash: macula 


n.m.l. 

unmula: digitus 

n.h.r. 

nahar: dies 

fi daw’ al-nahar: in luce diei 

n.h.y. 

nihaya: finis 
nihaya: terminus 

khutut bi-la-nihaya: lineae infinitae 
intaha: pervenire 

n.w/. 

naw': modus 
naw': species 
bi-al-naw': specialiter 
bi-al-naw' wa bi-al-shakhs: specialiter et 
secundum individuum 
suwar anwa al-ashya’: formae specierum 
kathir al-anwa : multimoda 
naw'iyya: specialitas 
naw'iyya: species 

naw'iyyat al-mubsar: species rei visae 


hudb: cilium 

h.d.b. 

hilal: luna 

h.1.1. 

h,m. m. 

hamma: quaerere 

hawa’: aer 

h. w.y. 


h.y.’. 


hay’a: dispositio 

'ala hay ’at (al-shay’): secundum suam 
dispositionem 
hay’a: figura 
hay’a: forma 

hay’at al-insan: forma hominis 
hay ’at al-basar: forma oculi 
hay’at al-basar: forma visus 
hay’at sath al-mubsar: forma superficiei 
rei visae 

mutahayyi’: paratus 
mutahayyi’: praeparatus 



168 


Glossary 


Arabic-Latin 


169 


w.t.r. 

wattara (or awtara): respicere 
wattara (or awtara): subtendere 

w.j.b. 

awjaba: affirmare 
awjaba: exigere 

w.j.d. 

wajada: in venire 

wa laysa najidu al-amra kadhalik: et nos 

non invenimus ita 

w.j.n. 

wajna: gena 

w.j.h. 

wajh: modus 

bi-hadha al-wajh: secundum hunc 
modum 

'ala wujuh mukhtalifa: secundum 
diversos modos 
wajh al-ard: facies terrae 
jiha: locus 
jiha: pars 
fi al-jiha: in parte 
ila jiha wahida: ad unam partem 
mutashabih fi ai-jiha: consimilis in parte 
jiha: ubitas 

muwajaha: oppositio directa 
U ghayat al-muwajaha li-l-basar: in fine 
directae opposition^ ad visum 
muwajaha: oppositio facialis 
muwajaha: oppositio recta 
samt al-muwajaha: verticatio 
oppositions 
muwajih: facialis 
muwajih: directe oppositus 

w.h.d. 

wahidan ba'da wahid: unum post aliud 
w.r.d. 

warada: advenire 
warada: venire 
wurud: eventus 
wardt: roseus 
tawrid: color roseus 

w.r.q. 

waraqa: pagina 

w.r.y. 

ma wara’ (al-shay’): quod est ultra ipsum 
min wara’: ultra 


w.z.y. 

muwazin: aequidistans 
(khutut) mutawaziya: (lineae) 
aequidistantes 


w.s.t. 

wasat: medium 

bi-tawassut hassat al-basar: mediante 
visu 

mutawassit: interiacens 

w.s.'. 

wasi': amplus 
ittasa'a: ampliari 
ittisa': amplificatio 

'ala ittisa': secundum amplificationem 

w.sh.m. 

washama: intingere 
wushum: maculae 

al-wushum wa al-masamm: maculae 
wushum: picturae 


w.s.f. 

wasafa: narrare 
sifa: dispositio 
sifa: modus 

'ala ba'd al-sifat: secundum quosdam 
modos 

'ala hadhihi al-sifa: secundum hunc 
modum 

'ala hadhihi al-sifa: tali modo 
'ala hadhidi al-sifat: secundum istos 
modos 

fa- 'ala hadhihi al-sifat: his ergo modis 
w.s.l. 

wasala: pervenire 
wasala bayna: copulare 
ittisal: continuum 
ittisal: continuatio 
muttasil: continuatus 
muttasil bi-: continuus cum 

w.d.'. 

wad': positio 

wad' mutashabih: positio consimilis 
wad' mukhtalif: positio diversa 
'ala akthar al-awda': in pluribus 
positionibus 
wad': situs 
mawdi': locus 

dhalik al-mawdu': illud habens situm 


w.f.q. 

muwafiq: conveniens 
ittafaqa: accidere 

ittifaq (fi ma'nan min al-ma'ani): 

convenientia (in aliquo) 

w.g.t. 

waqt: nora 

fi waqt wahid: in una hora 
w.q.r. 

al-waqar wa al-samt: gravitas et 
tacitumitas [sic] 

w.q.', 

waqa'a: accidere 
waqa'a: cadere 

yaqa'u ma'ahu al-yaqin: cadet super 
ipsum certitudo 

w.l.y. 

waliya: esse oppositum 

waliya: esse propinquum 

waliya: sequi 

alladhi yali: sequens 

yall al-basar: sequens visum 

alladhi yali: vicinans 

yali al-mubsar: in parte rei visae 

mimma yali al-basar: in parte visus 

awla min ghayrih: dignius est alio 

w.h.m. 

tawahhama: imaginare 
mutawahham: imaginabilis 
mutawahham: intellectus 
mutawahham (said of a line): intellecta 
mutawahhama (said of lines): imaginabiles 
tutawahham (said of lines): intelliguntur 


yubs: siccitas 
yabis: siccus 

y.b.s. 

yara': noctiluca 

y.r.'. 

yasir: modicus 

y.s.r. 


yasir (said of time): modicus 
daw’ yasir: modica lux 
yasira jiddan (said of lights): valde debiles 
fi zamam yasir al-miqdar: in minimo 
tempore 
yasir: parvus 
yasiran: raro 
mutayasir: sinister 
mutayasir: in sinistro 

y.q.n. 

yaqin: certitudo 
tayaqqana: certificari 
tayaqqun: certitudo 
bi-al-tayaqqun: certe 
bi-al-hads wa al-tayaqqun: per 
argumentationem et certificationem 
mutayaqqan: certificatus 
mutayaqqan: certus 
mutayaqqan: verus 

y.m.n. 

mutayamin: dexter 
mutayamin: in dextro 


LATIN-ARABIC GLOSSARY 


Latin-Arabic 


i73 


ablatio: iltifat II 50b 
abscidere: qata'a I 94a 
absterrere: naza'a III 19b 

secundum accessionem et remotionem: f! al-taqaddum wa al-ta’akhkhur II 72b 
accidens: 'arad II 93b 
accidentalis: 'aradl II 38a 

per viam accidentalem: bi-tariq al-'arad II 93 b 
accidentaliter: bi-tariq al-'arad II 121a 
accidere: 'arada II 19b, mb 
accidere: ittafaqa III 25b 
accidere: waqa'a III 3b 
accipere: akhadha III 18a 
accipere: ittakhadha III 17b 
acquiescere: istaqarra II 94a 
acquirere: iqtana II 139b, 141a 
acquisitio: iktisab II 93b 
actio: fi'l III 4a 
adiunctio: ijtima' II 63b 
admisceri: iitabasa II 105a 
admixtus: multabis I 117b 

colores admixti: alwan multabisa I 68b 
advenire: warada II 50b 
aequalis: musawin 

(latera) aequaiia: (adla*) mutasawiva II 83b 
aequalitas: casawin II 104b 
aequalitas: istiwa’ II 1 16b 
aequidistans: muwazin I 75b, 1 1 5a 
aestimare: hadasa II 58a, 98a 
aestimare vel arguere: hadasa II 58b 
aestimare: zanna II 68b, 149b 
aestimatio: hads II 58b, 66b, 87a 
aestimatione: bi-al-hads II 87a 
per aestimationem: bi-al-hads II 58b 
cognoscere secundum aestimationem: hadasa II 57b 
aestimatus: maznun II 10 ib 
afjfirmare: awjaba II 8b 
aggregare: jama f a I 105b 
aggregare: ijtama'a II 1 17a 
aggregare: harrara I 83a, 98b 
aggregari: istaqarra I 98b 
aggregatio: ijtima' II 109a 

albugineus: al-baydiyya (i.e. al-rutuba al-b.) I 74b 
albus: abyad I 73 b 

albedinis debilis: musfir I 122a 

(corpus) mundum album: (jism) naql al-bayad I 67b 
(tempore) aliquanto: (zamanan) mahsusan I 117b 
(spatium) aliquantulum: (masafa) muqtadira I 75a 
per aliquid extrinsecum: li-ma'nan min kharij II 57a 
altera tio: athar I r 17b 
altera tio: istihala I 1 14b 
alteratio: taghayyur II 40a, 47a 
ambo: jamfan III 23a 
amilialmon: abu qalamun I 72a, II 123a 


174 


Glossary 


Latin-Arabic 


175 


ampliari: ittasa'a I 73a 
amplificatio: ittisa* I 75a 

secundum ampliiicationem: 'ala ittisa'in I 75a 
amplus: fasih II 108b 
amplus: wasi* 1 130a 

amygdalitas oculorum: talwlz al-'aynayn II 126a 

angulus: zawiya II 8 1 a 

angustari: daqa II 84b 

anima: nafs II 38a 

animadvertere: i'tabara II 78a 

animal: dabba II 145a 

animalitas: hayawaniyya II 147a 

anterior: muqaddam II 3b 

in anteriori uveae: t! muqaddam al-*inabiyya I 129a 

aperire: fataha II 47b 

apparere: zahara II 102a, 149a 

apparere sensui: zahara Ii-1-hiss I 87b 

applicare: alsaqa III 18b 

applicatus: maltasiq II 51a, 1 18b 

apprehensio: idrak II 24a 

appropinquari: takhassasa I 97b 

appropriari: khassa I 97a 

appropriari: ikhtassa I 100a 

appropriari: takhassasa II 136a 

appropriatur suo individuo: (al-sura al-juz’iyya) allati takhussu shakhsa (al-shav’) II 141a 
intentiones quae appropriantur formae hominis: al-ma'ani allati takhussu hay' at 
al-insan II 142b 

appropriatus: mutakhassis I 97b 
apud: 'inda II 21b 

apud oppositionem: t! hal al-muqabala II 10 1 a 
apud visionem: ti hal al-ibsar II 49b 
apud visum: 'inda hassat al-basar II 21b 
aranea: 'ankabutiyya ( i.e . al-tabaqa al-\) I 74a 
arbores: nabat II 22b 
arcualis: muqawwas I 98a 

arcualitas in superciliis: qurna fi al-hajib II 142b 
arguere: istadalla II 55a 
argumentatio: istidlal II 55a 
argumentatio: hads II 58a 
argumentatio: qiyas II 25b, 27b, 36a, 44a 

per argumentationem et certificationem: bi-al-hads wa al-tayaqqun II 58a 
per argumentationem et distinctionem: bi-al-qiyas wa al-tamyiz II 83b 
argumentum: dalil 185b 
argumentum: qiyas II 55b, 101b 

per argumentum et significationem: bi-al-qiyas wa al-istidlal II 130a 
aspectus: mulaha?a II 131a 

apud aspectum: fT hal al-mulahaza II 131b 
aspectus: nazar III 2b 
aspectus: cf. comprehensio 

primo aspectu: bi-al-badiha II 148b 
in primo aspectu: bi-al-badiha II 151a 
asper: khashin II 114b 
asperitas: khushuna II 36b, 114b 


aspicere: lahaza II 59a, 132a 

aspicere: nazara I 120a, II 89a 

aspiciens: nazir II 94b, III 2b, 3b 

assimilare: shabbaha II 58a, 98a 

assimilatio: shabah II 146b 

assimilatio: tashblh II 23b, 94b 

assimilatio: tashabbuh II 139b 

multae assimilationis: kathir al-shabah II 146b 

paucae assimilationis: qalil al-shabah II 146b 

associari: sahiba 182b 

esse assuefactum: alifa II 1 12a 

assuetudo: i'tiyad II 58a 

assuetus: ma’luf II 43b, 99a, 144a 

esse asymmetrum: bay ana II 125b 

asymmetrus: cf. proportio 

attritio: khaml I 73 b 

auferre: rafa'a II 45a 

auferre: naza'a III 19b 

auferri: injala I 67b 

auferri: zala I 1 1 8a 

augmentatio: ta'azum II 85a 

augmentum: tafadul II 34b 

advertere: mayyala II 88b 

axis: sahm II 102b 

axis communis: sahm mushtarak III 9b 
axis pyramidis: sahm al-makhrut II 3a 

basis: qa'ida II 81b, III 4b 

cadere: waqa'a I 88a, II 48a 

cadet super ipsum certitudo: yaqa'u ma'ahu al-yaqin I 88a 
caeruleus: lazawardi (or lazuwardi) I 68b 
candela: siraj I 115b 

candelae: al-masabih wa al-shumu* II 122b 

capilli: sha'r II 109a 

causa: 'ilia I 127a, II 120a 

causa est quia: 'illat dhalik annahu I 124a 

causa illius est: al-'illa fi dhalik anna I 127a, II 29a 

causa in hoc est: al-'illa fi dhalik anna II 26a 

propter istam causam: li-hadhihi al-'illa II 79b 

propter duas causas: li-halatayn III 15b 

duabus de causis: li-halatayn II 8a 

fiat cavatura . . . concavitate rotunda: wa-l-nakhriq . . . kharqan mustadiran III I7b-i8a 

centrum: markaz II 81b 

cera: sham* III 18a 

cerebrum: dimagh I 73a 

certe: bi-al-tayaqqun II 87a 

certificare: tahdlq III 27b 

certificare: harrara II 70a, 78a, 83b, 95a 

certificare: haqqaqa II 95b, 102b, III 2a 

certificare: tahaqqaqa II 132a 

certificari: taharrara II 93 b 

certificari: tahaqqaqa II 54b 


176 


Glossary 


Latin- Arabic 


177 


certificari: tayaqqana II 91b 
certificatio: tahqlq III 27a 

per argumentationem et certificationem: bi-al-hads wa al-tayaqqun II 58a 

certificatur: yatahaqqaq wa yataharrar II 106a 

certificatus: muharrar II 100a 

certificate: muhaqqaq III 8a, 27a, 28b 

certificatus: mutayaqqan II 52b, 59a 

magis certificatus: ashaddu tahaqquqan III 13b 

non certificatus: mushtabih ghayr muhaqqaq III 14b, 28b 

vera comprehensione et certificata: idrakan muhaqqaqan 'ala al-tahrir II 63b 
est certioris visionis: yakunu asdaqa ru’ya II 96a 
certitudo: tahqiq II 152a 

in fine certitudinis: fl ghayat al-tahqiq II 1 52a 
certitudo: yaqin I 88a 
certitudo: tayaqqun II 58b 

in fine certitudinis: ft ghayat al-tahrir II 100a 
certus: muhaqqaq III 26b 
certus: mutayaqqan II 53a, 92a 
non cessare: la yazal II 103b 
cilium: hudb I 81a 

in circuitu eius: 'an jawanib (al-shay 5 ) II 1 18a 
circulus: da’ira I 77a 
circumgyratio: istidara II 43b 
circundans: muhlt III 7a 

(corpus album) clare albedinis: (jism abvad) naqi al-bayad I 70a 

clare albus: naqi al-bavad I 68a 

claritas (colons): safa’ (al-lawn) I 71b 

clarus: safin I 74b 

claudere: ghammada II 88a 

cognitio: ma'rifa II 151a 

cognitio praecedens: taqaddum al-ma'rifa II 151a 
cognitio speciei: ma'rifa bi-ai-naw' II 23b 
apud cognitionem: ft hal al-ma'rifa II 23a 
per cognitionem: bi-al-ma'rifa II 22b 

per cognitionem antecedentem: bi-taqaddum al-ma'rifa II 49b 

per cognitionem et per scientiam antecedentem: bi-al-ma'rifa wa bi-taqaddum al-ma'rifa 
II 108a 

per cognitionem praecedentem: bi-taqaddum al-ma'rifa II 144a 

virtus cognitionis: quwwat al-ma'rifa II 24b 

cognoscere: ahassa II 119a 

cognoscere: istadalla II 117a 

cognoscere: 'arafa II 60a, 136a 

cognoscere: 'alima II 58b 

cognoscere: cf aestimatio 

collocari: dakhala tahta II 34a 

collocatur sub hoc modo: min jumiat hadha al-naw' II 60b 

collocatur sub ordinatione: yadkhulu tahta al-tartlb II 72a 

color: sibgh I 127b 

color: lawn I 123a 

color fortis: lawn qawl I 123a 

color fuscus: sibgh adkan I 127b 

color in eo quod est color: al-lawn bi-ma huwa lawn II 40b, 44b 
color scintillans: lawn mushriq I 123a 


coloratus: mulawwan 1 72a 
columnatus: ustuwanl III 18a 
communis: mushtarak I 73a, III 5b 
communis: cf axis, nervus 
comparare: qasa II 57b, 81b 
comparatio: qiyas II 20b, 23b, 72b, 81b, 109b 

per comparationem alterius ad alterum: bi-qiyas ahadihima bi-al-akhar II 32a 

per distinctionem et comparationem: bi-al-tamylz wa al-qiyas II 85b 

complere: ata 'ala II 130a 

compleri: tamma I 99b, II 87a 

iam complevimus: fa-qad atayna'ala II 130a 

componi: ta’allafa II 131a 

componi: taqawwama II 6ia, 131a 

componitur: murakkab III 8b 

quod componitur: ma ta’allafa 183a 

compositio: ta’llf II 26a, 121a, 127a 

compositio: ta’alluf II 120b 

compositio: cf coniunctio 

compositus: muta’allif II 125b 

compositus: murakkab I 73a, II 120b 

compositus: muqtarin II 127b 

comprehendere: haza I 92a 

comprehendere: adraka 

pars quam comprehendit pyramis: al-juz’ alladhl vahuzuhu al-makhrut I 92a 
non comprehenditur a visu: khafiya an ai-basar II 96a 
comprehensio: idrak 

comprehensio per intuitionem: idrak bi-al-ta’ammul II 132a 

comprehensio per intuitionem cum scientia praecedente: idrak bi-al-ta’ammul ma'a 
taqaddum al-ma'rifa II 140a 

comprehensio per primum aspectum: idrak bi-al-badlha II 132b 
comprehensio per rationem: idrak bi-al-istidlal II 22a 
comprehensio quae est per intuitionem: idrak bi-al-ta’ammul II 132b 
comprehensio sola intuitione: idrak bi-mujarrad al-ta’ammul II 140a 
comprehensio superficialis: idrak bi-al-badiha II 132a 

comprehensio superficialis quae est in primo aspectu: idrak bi-al-badlha II 132b 
comprehensione larga: idrakan mujmalan II 63b 
comprehensione qualicunque: idrakan mujmalan II 134b 
vera comprehensione: idrakan mutayaqqanan II 59b 

vera comprehensione et certificata: idrakan muhaqqaqan 'ala al-tahrir II 63b 
conca vitas: tajwlf I 74b 
concavitas: taq'Ir I 73 b 

concavitas nervi communis: tajwif al-'asaba III 9a 
concavum ossis: muqa"ar al-'azm II 2b 
conca vus: ajwaf I 73 b 
conceptus: mutakhayyal II 58b 

(opinio) concessa a mathematicis: (ra’y) ijtama'a 'alayh ashab al-ta'allm I 98a 

concha: sadafa I 70b 

concurrere: iltaqa I 1 10a, II 2a, III 13a 

conditio: shart I 84b 

congregare: ijtama'a II 4b, III 4a 

congregata: mujtami'a (pi) III 33b 

congregatio: ijtima' III 33b, 34a 

congregatio formae: ijtima' al-sura III 34a 


178 


Glossary 


Latin-Arabic 


179 


maxima congregatio: ijtima' mutafawit III 33b 

compositio et coniugatio: iqtiran wa ta’alluf II 120b 

coniunctio: iqtiran II 120a 

coniunctio: iltiqa’ III 5b 

coniungere: iltaqa III 4a, 4b 

considerare: ta’ammala II 22a, 127b, 140a 

considerare: i'tabara II 85b, 1 15b, III 26a 

considerabit angulum: ya'tabiru bi-al-zawiya II 85b 
considerare: istaqra’a II 127a, 132b, 140a, 143a, 151b, 151b 
considerare per intuitionem: istaqra’a bi-al-ta’ammul II 140a 
considerare: kashafa I 103a 
considerare: lahaza II 70b 
considerare: nazara I 85a 
consideratio: ta’ammulll 131a, 30b, 143b 
consideratio: i'tibar II 81b, 84a, III 28a 
consideratio: tafaqqud II 91a, 132a, 151a, 152a 
consideratio: istiqra II 151b 
consideratio subtilis: ta’ammul II 131a 
(colores) consimiles: (alwan) mutaqariba II 131a 
(situs, positio) consimilis: (wad*) mutashabih I 81 a. III 6b 
(situs) consimiles: (awda*) mutashabiha I 96b 
consimilis formae: mutashabih al-sura II 117a 
consimilis in remotione: mutashabih t! al-bu'd III 6b 
(superficies) consimilis ordinationis: (sath) mutashabih al-tartib II 6b 
consimilis valde: fi ghayat ai-tashabuh III 7b 
consimilitudo: tashabuh II 8b, 34b, 123b 
consistere: taqawwama (min) II 49a 
consolidari: iltahama I 73 a 
consolidatio: iltiham I 77a 

consolidativa: al-multahima ( i.e . al-tabaqa al-m.) I 73b 

consonantia: i’tilaf II 127b 

consonoritas: i’tilaf II 125a 

consuescere: 'ahida II 149b 

consuetudo: *ada II 33a 

contactus: mulamasa 1 103 b 

contigi: hadatha II 149b 

contiguatio: tamass II 109a 

(corpora) contigua: (ajsam) mutamassa II 72b 

continere: ahatall 14b, 81b, III 5b 

continere: ishtamala I 106b, III 4b 

contingens: mumass 1 127a, II 45b 

contingere: lahiqa 185b 

contingere: massa I 74b 

quam facit contingere res visa in visu: (al-shay’) alladhl yuhdithuhu al-musbsar fi al-basar 
I 1 00 b 

continuatio: ittisal II 109a, III 7b 
continuatus: muttasil II 107b 
continuum: ittisal II 34b 
continuus cum: muttasil bi- III 7a 
contradicere: ‘arada 1 1 17a 
contrarie: bi-al-'aks 1 95a 
contrarius: mun'akis I 96a 
conveniens: muwafiq I 105a, II 17b 


convenientia (in aliquo): ittifaq (fi ma*nan min al-ma'ani) II 20b 

conversio: in*ikas (reversion) II 5a 

con versus: mun'akis ( inverted) 1 93 b, II 5b 

convexum: hadaba I 73a 

cooperire: satara I 69a, 126b, III 8b 

copulare: wasala bayna III 6a, 9a 

cornea: al-qarniyya I 73b 

cornu nasi: qurnat al-anf III 1 8a 

corporeitas: tajassum II 34b, 74a 

minimi corporis: saghlr al-hajm III 16a 

corpus (hominis): qamat (al-insan) II 144b 

corpus sentiens: see sentiens 

corrumpi: batala I 85b 

corruptio: fasad I 85b 

crassus: ghaliz I 85b 

crescere: inshaqqa I 73a 

cubitum: dhira* III 17b 

currere: jara II 9b 

curvus: munhanin I 98 a 

custodire: hafiza I 29a, II 8a 

ita ut eius [i.e. glacialis] natura sit custodita: li-tahfaza 'alavha [i.e. *ala al-jalldiyya] 
surataha I 29a 

(luces) valde debiles: (adwa’) yasira jiddan I 1 19b 
debilis: da' if I 67b 

debilis diaphanitatis: da'If al-shatif II 118b 
debilis lucis: da'If al-daw’ I 67b, II 119a 
debilis lux: daw’ munkasirll 123a 
debilitas: da'fl 123b, II 152b 
debilitas sensus: qusur quwwat al-hiss II 46b 
in fine debilitatis: fi ghayat al-da e f I 123b 
deceptiones visus: aghlat al-basar III lb 
deceptus: ghalit III 2b 
decipi: ghalita III 2a 
declarare: bayyana I 124b, 140a 
declarare: sharaha II 101a 
declarare: qarrara III 3 b 

et cum declarata sint omnia ista: wa idh qad tabayyanajamf dhalik II 34a 

declaratio: bayan III 27a 

declinabilis: ma’il III 5a 

declinans: ma’il I 87b, II 11a 

declinans a: ma’il 'an III 22b 

declinans aut obliquus: ma’il II 103 a 

declinare: mala 1 94a 

visum declinare: sarafa al-basara 1 67b 

declinatio: inhina’ 1 75b 

deferens: hamil II 44b 

aer deferens formam: al-hawa’ al-hamil li-l-sura II 44b 

demonstratio: tabyin I 95a 

densus: safiq I 73b 

densus: kathlf I 70a, 120a 

densus non translucens: kathlf I 86a 

destructio: butlan I 85b 


19 



Glossary 


Latin-Arabic 


180 

destructio diaphanitatis: inqita' al-shafTf 185b 
destructio lineae: inqita' aJ-samt I 86a 
destrui: batala I 83a 
destrui: intaqada I 99a, II 50b 
determinare: bayyana II 89a 

determinabitur ergo ex ista experimentatione: fa-yatabayyan min hadha al-i'tibar 
II 89a 

determinare: haddada III 1 8b 
determinant inhasara II 84a 
determinatus: makhsus II 37a 
determinatus: mahsur II 94b 
determinatus: bi-al-tafsll wa al-tahrir II 131a 
dexter: mutayamin III 24b 
indextro: mutayamin III 19b 
diametrus: qutr II 83a, 134b 
medietas diametri: nisf al-qutr III 10b 
aequalium diametrorum: mutasawl al-aqtar III 2a 
inaequalium diametrorum: mukhtalif al-aqtar III 2b 
maximarum diametrorum: fasih al-aqtar III 7a 
diaphanitas: shatTf I 106b, II 34b, 117b 

cum eo quod est ex eo de diaphanitate: bi-ma fiha min al-shafif I 106b 

debilis diaphanitatis: da'if al-shatif II 1 1 8b 

in fine diaphanitatis: t! ghavat al-sha£!f II 1 18a 

diaphanus: mushiff I 74b, 100b 

corpus diaphanum: al-jism al-mushiff I 100b 

dicere: qala I 1 17a 

dies: nahar II 123a 

in luce diei: f! daw’ al-nahar II 123a 
differentia: ikhtilaf III 21a 
differentia: tafawut III 28a 
differentia communis: fasl mushtarak II 6b 
maxima differentia: ikhtilaf mutala wit III 23b 
differentia sensibilis: ikhtilaf mahsus III 8a 
difficultas: takalluf II 31a 
digitus: i$ba' III 17b 
digitus: unmula II 108a 
dignius est alio: awla min ghayrih I 90a 
dignius est: akhliq bi-an yakuna I 82b 
dignum est: akhliq bi-an yakuna I 82a 
dilatari: intashara l73a 
diminutio: tasaghur II 85a 

directio figurarum literarum: taqwim ashkal al-huruf II 121b 

dirigere pupillam ad: haddaqa ila III 4a, 20a 

discoopertus: munkashif II 45b 

discooperiri: injala I 67b 

esse discoopertum: yankashif II 115a 

discretio: tafarruq II 109a 

discretio et separatio: tafarruq II 34b 

dispositio: hal 1 101a, 120b, II 2a, 135a, III 19a 

dispositio: sifa I 81a 

dispositio: hay’a II 9a 

dispositio oculi: tarklb al-basar I 81 a 

dispositio partium: ta’lif al-ajza’ II 121b 


ex hoc dispositione: min hadhihi al-hal III 21b 

in ilia dispositione: f! tilka al-hal I 92b 

secundum suam dispositionem: 'ala hay’at (al-shay’) II 9a 

secundum omnes dispositiones: 'ala tasarif al-ahwal I 10 1 a, II 132a 

in omnibus dispositionibus: 'ala tasarif al-ahwal II 2b 

in fine bonae dispositionis: f! ghayat al-taqwim II 121b 

secundum utramlibet dispositionum: 'ala kila al-halayn II 108a 

distantia: bu'd II 2a, 54a 

distantia: tafarruq II 108b 

visibilia distantia ab invicem: al-mubsarat al-mutafarriqa II 56b 

duo corpora distincta non di versa :jisman munfasilan II 108a 

visibilia distincta: al-mubsarat al-mutafarriqa II 59a, 10 ia 

res visae distinctae: al-mubsarat al-mutafarriqa II 56b 

distinctio: tafarruq II 107a 

distinctio: tafsll 1 105a 

distinctio: istiqra’ II 24a, 27a 

distinctio: tamylz II 2a, 22a, 30b 

distinctio: cf. comparatio 

distinctio ampla: tafarruq fasih wa fihi sa'a II 108b 

per distinctionem et argumentationem: bi-al-tamyiz wa al-qiyas II 44a 

locus distinctionis: mawdi' al-tafriq II 107b 

virtus distinctiva: al-tamylz II 26b 

virtus distinctiva: al-quwwa al-mumayyiza II 25b 

distinctus: munfasil II 108a 

(pars) distincta per pyramidem: (al-juz’ alladhl) infasala bi-al-makhrut I 92b 

virtus distinguendi: quwwat al-tamylz II 22a 

homo distinguens: insan mumayyiz II 74b 

distinguere: haza II 3a 

distinguere: farraqa II 21b, mb 

distinguere: fasala I 106a, II 3a, III 33b 

distinguere: fassala II 112a 

distinguere: mayyaza I 114b, II ioia 

distingui: infasala 1 92b, 93a 

distingui: tamayyaza 1 93 b 

distingui a pyramide: infasala bi-al-makhrut I 92b 

in aere quam distinguit ipsa pyramis: fi al-hawa’ alladhi yahuzuhu hadha al-makhrut 
I 1 06a 

distingui tur: ikhtassa I 10 1 a 

diversari: ikhtalafa II 38a 

diversari: taghayyara II 2b 

diversificari: ikhtalafa I 107b 

diversitas: ikhtilaf II 34b, mb, III 21b 

diversitas: tash'Ith II 10b 

diversitas: tafawut II 19a, 108b 

magna diversitas: tafawut musrif II 58b, 60a, 100b 

maxima diversitas: tafawut musrif II 100a 

divers us: mukhalif I 117a 

di versus: mukhtalif 1 115a 

di versus: munfasil II 108 a 

di versus ab altero: ghayr al-akhar II 109b 

dividere: fassala II 5 ia 

divisio: tafarruq II 122a 

dolor: alam II 9a 


181 


1 82 


Glossary 


inducere dolor em: alama I 107k 

domus: bayc I 68a, II 54a 

dubitabilis: mushtabih III 14a, 27a, 30a, 30b 

dubitabilis: multabis III 16a 

intentio dubitabilis: ma'nan multabis II 81a 

dubitari: iltabasa II 105a 

dubitatio: ishtibah III 16a 

non dubitatur: la yaqa'u fihi labs I 1 17b 

dubium: labs II 93a 

sine dubio: la labsa fihi II 93a 

dum: ma dama III 16b, III 20a, 20b 

diu duraverit aspectus: atala al-nazara III 2b 

effici: sara III 1 1 b 
effici: taqawwama II 64b 
elevare: rafa'a II 83a 
elongare: taba'ada II 81b 
equus: faras II 142b 

erectio corporis: intisab al-qama II 144b 

quantitas erectionis hominis: qamat al-insan II 144b 

erigere: aqama III 18a 

erigere: nasaba III 32b 

errare: ghalita II 100b 

error: ghalat II 140a 

et tunc: ma'a dhalik II 135a 

non potest evadere ab altero duorum modorum: laysa yakhlu min ahad amrayn II 45a 

eventus: wurud II 29a 

excessus: tafadul II 79a 

excessus: tafawut II 82a 

magnus excessus: tafawut lahu qadr II 82a 

gratia exempli: 'ala tariq al-mithal II 124a 

exeuns: kharij I 79a 

exigere: awjaba II 7a 

exire: kharaja II 1 ib 

exire: sadara I 82a 

existens: thabit II 1 10b 

existimare: zanna II 53b, 54b 

experientia: i'tibar III 23b, 26a 

ratione et experientia: bi-al-qiyas wa al-i'tibar III 23b 
experimentare: i'tabara I 87a, 95a, 119a 
experimentatio: i'tibar II 41a, 53 b, 138a 

experimentatione igitur istarum intentionum: fa-min al-i'tibar bi-hadhihi al-ma'ani 
1183b 

experimentatione subtili: i'tibaran muharraran I 95a 
experimentatione vera: i'tibaran muhaqqaqan I 95a 
experimentator: mu'tabir II 54b, III 1 8b 
experiri: i'tabara I 87b, III 31b 
vero modo exponere: harrara (mss. nujarrid) I 98b 
nos vero modo exponemus quaestionem: fa-inna nuharrir al-da*wa 1 98b 
expositio: sharh III 23a 
extendi: imtadda I 100b 
forma extensa: al-sura al-mumtadda I 100b 
extra: kharij 'an III 14a 


L 


183 

Latin-Arabic 

extra mediocritatem: kharij 'an al-i'tidal II 95b 
extrahere: akhraja III 17b, 27b 
diversitas extranea: ikhtilaf mutafawit II 82b 
extranea fortitudine: bi-al-ifrat I 1 17b 
remotio valde extranea: bu'd mutafawit II 57a 
extraneitas: tafawut II 53a 
extraneus: gharib II 24a, 140a 
extraneus: mutafawit I 119a, II 53b 
extremitas: taraf I 75a, II 86a 
extremum: taraf II 124a 
extrema literarum: atraf al-huruf II 124a 
extrinsecus: kharij II 57a 

facere angulum: fa'ala zawiyatan II 96b 

facere pulchritudinem: fa'ala al-husna II 120b 

facialis: muwajih II 28a, 30a 

facies terrae: wajh al-ard III 2b 

opinio falsa: ra’y mustahll I 104a 

falsum: muhal I 103a 

ut prius fecit: 'ala mithli ma kana III 29a 

fere: rubba ma III 5b 

figere: thabata I 106b 

figere: thabbata III 27a 

figura: shakl II 25a, 138b 

figura: hay’a II 73a, 74b, 101b 

figura faciei: takhut al-wajh II 136b 

figurari: tashakkala I 105b, II 78a, 104a, 135b, 143b 

figurari in anima: thabata fi al-nafs II 144a 

figurari in imaginatione: thabata fi al-takhayyul II I39 a 

figuratio: shakl II 37b 

figura tio: tashakkul II 144a 

figuratus: matashakkil II 136a, III 4b 

figuratus in imaginationem: mutashakkil fi al-takhayyul II 9°^ 
filium: shaziyya II 9a 

filia nervorum: shazaya al-'asab II 9a 
finis: ghaya II 124b 

in fine: cf. debilitas, diaphanitas, dispositio, gracilitas, turpi tudo, veritas, etc. 
finis: nihaya I 77a 

fixus in anima: hasil fi al-nafs II 136b 

fixus in eodem statu: thabit 'ala hal wahida III 9b 

fixus in suo loco: lazim li-wad*ih II 103a 

fixus in suo situ: lazim li-wad'ih II 103 b 

magis fixus in anima: athbatu fi al-nafs II 137a 

flores: al-azhar wa al-anwar II 121a 

fluxibilis: maT I 129a 

foedus: qabth II 32a 

foramen: thaqb 1 76a 

foramen: manfadh 1 119b 

forma: sura 

forma: ma'na II 142a 

forma: hay’a II 78b, 87b, 134a, 135b, 138b, 141a, 145a, 145b 
forma hominis: hay*at al-insan II 142b 
forma oculi: hay’at al-basar 1 1 12a 



Glossary 


Latin-Arabic 


185 


f 

forma particulars: sura juz’iyya II 141a 
forma propria: surat (al-shay’) allati takhussuhu II 140b 
forma sensibilis: sura mahsusa II 40a 
forma superficiei rei visae: hay’at sath al-mubsar II 77b 
universalis forma speciei: al-sura al-kulliyya allati takhussu naw'a (al-shay*) II 141a 
forma visus: hay’at al-basar I 102b, II 2a 

formae existentes in anima et praesentes memoriae: al-ma'am al-qa’ima fi al-nafs wa 
hadira li-l-dhikr II 142a 
formari: tashakkala 191b 
fortasse: rubba ma III 6b 
forte: rubba ma II 54b, 138b, III 2a 
fortis: qawi I 123a 
fortis: matin I 73b, 129b 
fortitudo: quwwa I 125a, 128a 
fortitudo: matana I 129a 
fortitudo visus: quwwat al-basar II 1 52b 
frequentatio: istimrar II 51b, 64a, 90b, 93b 
frequentatio: takrar II 60a 
frequentatio: takarrur II 90b, 135a 
frons: jabha II 126a 
frustatus: mardud I 74a 
fumus: dukhan I 129a 
| fuscitas: cf viriditas 

(color) fuscus: (sibgh) adkan I 127b 

gena: wajna II 123b 

generaliter: bi-al-jumla I 105a, II 34b 

generari: lmtadda I 101a 

genus: jins I 107b 

gibbositas: tahdlb II 78b 

glacialis: al-jalldiyya ( i.e . al-rutuba al-j.) I 74a 

glaucus: ashhal I 73 b 

gracilis: daqlq II 126b 

gracilitas: diqqa II 126a 

in fine gracilitatis: f! ghayat al-diqqa II 126a 
gracilitas oris: latafat al-fam II 126a 
gra vitas et taciturnitas: al-waqar wa al-samt II 122b 
gyratio: inhina’ II 102b 
gyratur: munhanin II 2b 

hoc: ma'na II 54a 

hoc: hadha al-ma'na I 102b, 105a, 115b, 117b, 124b 

homo: insan II 74b 

hora: waqt I 103a, II 109b 

in una hora: fi waqt wahid II 109b 

hortus: bustan II 145b 

humefacere: rattaba I 129a 

humidus: ratb I 73b, 129a 

humor: rutuba 1 74a 

humor albugineus: al-rutuba al-baydiyya I 129a 

illud: hadha al-ma'na III 2b 
illuminatio: ida’a II 37b 
illuminatus: mudf I 127b, 72b 


illuminatus per se: mudf min dhatih II 40a 
imaginabilis: mutawahham I 91b, III 4b 

(lineae) imaginabiles: (khutut) mutawahhama I 105b 
imaginare: takhayyala II 86b 
imaginare: tawahhama II 12a, III 9a 
imaginatio: takhayyul II 104a 
immutare: sabagha I 114b 
immutatio: athar I 118a 
impedimentum: 'a’iq III 25b 
impedire: 'aqa III 4b 
impossibilis: mumtanf I 97a 
impossibile esse: imtana'a I 97a 
imprimi: intaqasha III 34a 
inaequalitas: ikhtilaf II 104b 
inclinatus: ma’il I 90b 
incrementum: mansha’ 1 73 a 

incurvatio: inhina’ II 36b, III 8b % 

indigentia: haja II 27b, 115a 
indigere: ihtaja II 30b 
individualiter: bi-al-shakhs II 141b 
individuitas rei visae: shakhsiyyat al-mubsar II 144a 
individuum: shakhs II 20a, 136a, III 2b 
secundum individuum: bi-al-shakhs II 141b 
individuus: mu'ayyan II 34a 

res visa individua: mubsar mu'ayyan II 34a 
indubitabilis: ghayr mushtabih III 15a 
inducere: istaqra’a I 87a 

inducere dispositionem in anima: aththara fi al-nats II 120b 

inductio: istiqra’ I 119b, 23b 

inferius: munkhafid II 72b 

infigi: hasala III nb, 12a, 13b, 34a 

lineae infinitae: khutut bi-la-nihaya I 89a 

cum fuerit infixa: ldha hasala III 13b 

insensibilis: ghayr mahsus II 29b 

inspectio: ta’ammul II 120b 

per modicam inspectionem: bi-al-yasir min al-ta’ammul II 120b 

inspicere: ta’ammala II 132b 

inspicere: istaqra’a II 24a 

inspicere: nazara I 120a, III 2b, 4a 

inspiciens: nazir I 120a 

ins tans: an II 40b, 44b 

ins tans carens latitudine: al-an alladht la yanqasim II 46a 
instans (temporis): juz’ (min al-zaman) II 43 b 
institui: hasala III 7a, 24b, 34a 
instrumenta visus: alat al-basar I 128b 
instrumentum: ala I 128b 

instrumentum ponendi vinum in doliis: qim' I 73a 
insuper: ma'a dhalik II 21b 
intellect us: f aql II 29a 

solo intellectu: bi-mujarrad al-*aql II 29a 
intellectus: fahm II 25b 
intellectus: mutawahham 191a 

(linea) intellecta: (khatt) mutawahham I 106a 


1 86 


Latin- Arabic 


Glossary 

intelligere: fahima II 27a, 51b, 91b 

intelligibilis: mafhum III 27a 

intelliguntur: tutawahham (said of lines) I 105a 

intendere: i'tamada III 27b 

intentio: ma'na II ib 

intentio: qa$d II 91b 

sine intentione: min ghayr qasd II 91b 

intentiones occultae: al-ma'anl al-khafiyya II 147b 

intentiones particulares: al-ma'anl al-juz’iyya II 34b 

intentiones subtiles: al-ma'anl al-latifa II 97a, III 1 5a 

intentiones visibiles: al-ma'ani al-mubsara II 97a 

interiacens: mutawassit II 52b, 90b 

interior: dakhil I 76a 

intervallum: cf. remotio 

intingere: sabagha III 18a 

intingere: washama I 127b 

intuere: ta’ammala I 98a, II 94b, III 19a 

intuere: haddaqa ila I 67 

intuere: tafaqqada II 98b 

intueri: ta’ammala III 27b 

intueri: haddaqa ila II 65b 

intueri bene: an'ama al-ta’ammul III 27b 

intuitio: ta’ammul II 131b 

intuitio: tafaqqud II 131a 

intuitio: al-tafaqqud wa al-ta’ammul II 131b 

intuitio: mulahaza II 106b 

intuitio: cf comprehensio 

intuitio subtilis: tafaqqud II 131a 

modica intuitione: bi-al-yaslr min al-ta’ammul II 141a 

per magnam intuitionem: bi-fadl ta’ammul II 146a 

per solam intuitionem: bi-mujarrad al-ta’ammul II 140b 

per finem intuitionis: bi-ghayat al-ta’ammul II 152a 

in venire: wajada 1 1 16a 

et nos non invenimus ita: wa laysa najidu al-amra kadhalik I 1 16a 
veritatem invenire: a$aba II ioob 

(esse) isoperimetrorum: (ashkal) ihatatuha mutasawiya I 130a 

istud: hadha al-ma'na III 15a 

iterare: ista’nafa II 49a, 1 50b 

iterare: karrara II 94b 

iteratio: takrar II 51b 

iteratio: takarrur II 135b 

iudicare: hakama II 109a 


labium: shafa II 126b 
labor: ta'ammul II 32b 
labor: takalluf II 24b 
lacertus: 'adala I 81a 

in parte lachrymarum oculi: mimma yali muq al-'ayn I 81a 
laesio: afa I 85b 
lapis: jawhar I 72a 


lapis: hajar 1 99a, II 22b 

linea lata: khatt mu'tarid III 18b 

latens: khafi III 30a 

latentia: iltibas II 102a 

latentior: a^'af III 29a 

figura laterata: shakl mudalla' II 147a 

latere: khafiya 1 68b, 120a, II 45a, 98b 

latere: ishtabaha III 29b 

latere: iltabasa II 105a 

duobus lateribus centri: ‘an janbatay al-markaz III 22a 
in eius lateribus: 'anjanbatay (al-shay’) II 107b 
aequalium laterum: mutasawi al-a<Jla' II 83a 
figura multorum laterum: shakl kathlr al-adla' II 147a 
tanto magis latet: kana ashadda iltibasan III 30b 
latitudo: 'ard II 45b 

linea carens latitudine: khatt la 'arda lahu II 45b 
linea posita in latitudine: khatt mu'tarid III 19a, 27a 
linea recta in latitudine: khatt mu'tarid III 20b 
secundum latitudinem: fT al-'ard II 74b 
latus: janba III 22a 
latus: jamb III 28a 
latus: dil' II 83a 
latus: mu'tarid III 18b 

spatium latum: masafa mu'tarida II 1 1 ia 
lazuleus: lazawardl 171a 
levis: khafif III 17b 
le vitas: suhula 1 107b 
levitas: malasa II 34b 

propter levitatem operationum lucium debilium: li-suhulat ta’thlr al-adwa’ al-da'Tfa 

I 107b 

liber: maqala III 3a 

licere: ihtamala I ioob 

licet dicere: qad yumkinu an yuqal I 1 12a 

licet dicere: yuhtamalu an yuqal I ioob 

lignum: khashab III 17b 

linea: khatt 

linea: samt I 86a 

linea lata: khatt mu'tarid III 1 8b 

linea posita in latitudine: khatt mu'tarid III 18b 

linea recta in latitudine: khatt mu'tarid III 20b 

lineae radiales: khutut al-shu'a' I 98a, 105b 

lineae rectae: sumut 183a 

lineatio: takhtlt II 21b, 58a, 142b, III 15a 

lineatio aut picturae aut partes parvae: takhtit aw ghudun aw wushum aw ajza’ sighai 

II 97a 

lineatio faciei: takhtit al-wajh II 144b 

liquiditas: sayalan II 35a 

motus liquiditatis: harakat al-sayalan II 35a 

literae: huruf al-kitaba II 123 b 

locus: jiha II 61a 

locus: makan 1115a 

locus: mawdi* I 68a, II 48b, III 10a 



1 88 


Glossary 


Latin-Arabic 


longitudo: tul II 86b, III 5b 

in longitudine extensa: 'ala al-samt al-mumtadd II 1 1 ia 
secundum longitudinem: ft al-tul II 74b 
longus: mustatil II 123b, III 2a 
lumen: daw’ II 40a 

lumen accidentale: daw* 'aradi II 40a 
luminosus: mudi* I 129a 
luna: hilal II 122a 
lux: daw* 

lux essentialis: daw* dhati II 40a 

macula: athar II 149a 

macula: namash II 148b 

maculae: wushum II 121a 

maculae: al-wushum wa ai-masamm II 123a 

secundum magis et minus: bi-al-ziyada wa al-nuqsan II 72b 

secundum magis et minus: bi-al-ashadd wa al-ad'af I 107b 

magnitudo: 'izam I 105a, II 25a 

magnus: mutafawit II 68a, 8 1 b 

magnus: cf. maximus 

magnae quantitatis: fasih al-aqtar II 133a 
maior: a'zam III 20b 

pars manifesta oculi: zahir al-basar I 75a 
valde manifeste: 'ala abvan ma vumkin II 133b 
colores non manifesti: alwan mushtabiha II 41b 
manifestior: ashaddu tahaqquqan II 19a 
manifestus: bayyin II 96b, III 27a 
manifestus: zahir I 75a, 1 17b, II 145b 
non manifestus: mushtabih II 70b 
margo: hashiya III 20a 
mathematici: ashab al-ta'alim II 100b 
maxima differentia: ikhtilaf mutafawit III 23b 
maximarum diametrorum: fasih al-aqtar III 7a 
maximum: ghaya II 58a 
maximus: mutafawit II 1 1 5b, III 13b, 21b, 33b 
maximus: cf. magnus 

mediante visu: bi-tawassut hassat al-basar II 22b 

mediocris: mu'tadil II 52b, 71b, 95b, III 5b 

mediocritas: i'tidal II 52b 

extra mediocritatem: kharij 'an al-i' tidal II 52b 

medium: wasat II 3 b 

membrum: 'udw I ma, 102a 

membrum sentiens: al-'udw al-hass I 102a, II 2a, 7a 

meminisse: dhakara II 136a 

memoratio: dhikr II 136a 

vera memoratione: dhikran sahihan II 136a 

praesens memoriae: hadir li-l-dhikr II 23a 

mensura: miqdar II 48b, 52a, III 2a 

mensurare: i'tabara II 59a 

mensurare: qasa II 94a 

mensurare: masaha II 91a, 94b, 102b 

mensurari: taqaddara II 84a, 91b, 93a 

mensuratio qualiscunque non certa: hads II 55b 


micantes diaphani: jawahir mushiffa II 122b 
proportionis minimae respectu: da'If al-nisba jiddan ila I 127b 
quod est minimae proportionis: kana da'ifa al-nisba jiddan I 128b 
minimi corporis: saghlr al-hajm III 16a 
in minimo tempore: fi zaman yasir al-miqdar II 44b 
minus: cf. magis 
modicus: yasir II 116b, III 7b, 21a 
modica lux: daw’ yasir II 41b 
(tempus) modicus: (zaman) yasir II 117b 
modus: sifa I 123a, II 10b, 36a, 92a 

his ergo modis: fa-'ala hadhihi al-sifat III 8b 
tali modo: 'ala hadhihi al-sifa III 2b 
secundum istos modos: 'ala hadhihi al-sifat II 34a 
secundum hunc modum: ala hadhihi al-sifa II 36a, 92a 
modus: qism II 151b 
modus: naw' II 101a, 141a 
modus: wajh II 1 1 ib, 132a 

secundum hunc modum: bi-hadha al-wajh II ioob-ioia 
secundum di versos modos: 'ala wujuh mukhtalifa II 120b 
monstruosus: mushawwah II 6a 
morari: atala I 67b 
motus: haraka II 34b, 109b 
multimoda: kathlr al-anwa' III 2b 
multus: 'idda 1115a 
multus: mutafawit II 82a 
multus: kathir III 2b 
mulus: baghl II 145b 

(corpus) mundum album: (jism) naqi al-bayad I 67b 

mutare: intaqala II 103a 

mutatio: tabaddul II 112b 

mutatio: tash'ith II 149b 

mutatio: tasha"uth II 149b 

mutatio: taghayyur II 41b, 150b 

myrtus: rayhan II 146a 

narrare: iqtassa II 113b 
narrare: wasafa I 124a 
narratio: na't II 50a 
nasus: anf II 123b 
natura: sura I 129a 
natura: tabl'a I 105b 
natura: fitra II 28a 

natura intellectus: fitrat al-'aql II 50b 
non per naturam intellectus: la bifitrat al-'aql II 28b 
per naturam et intellectum: bi-fitrat al-'aql II 28a 
natus: matbu' II 134a 

natus est ad arguendum: matbu' 'ala al-qiyas II 3 ib 
nervus: 'asaba I 73a, III 10a 

nervus communis: al-'asaba al-mushtaraka I 73a 
niger: as wad I 129b 
noctiluca: yara' I 70b, t26a 


190 


Glossary 


Latin-Arabic 


nox: layl II 41b, 123a 

in nigredine noctis: fi sawad al-layl II 123a 

in noctibus lunae: fi al-layall al-muqmira II 123b 

in noctibus obscuris: fi al-layall al-muzlima II 123a 
numerus: 'adad II 109b 

obliquans: mun'atif II 16a 

obliquans: ma’il II 15a 

obliquari: in'atafa I 87b 

obliquari: mala I 87b 

obliquari: mala ila III 15b 

obliquatio: in'itaf I 86b, II 16a, 36b 

obliquatio superficiei corporis: in'itaf sath al-jism II 75a 

obliquatio: mayl II 64b 

modicae obliquationis: yasir al-mayl II 67b 

obliquatus: ma’il I 87b 

obliquus: mun'atif II 107b 

obliquus ad locum remotionis: mun'atif Ila jihat al-taba'ud II 107b 
obliquus: ma’il II 105a 
obliquus a: ma’il 'an III 1 5a 
obliquus super: ma’il 'ala I 94a 
oblivio: msyan II 137a 
obscurare: kasafa I 122b 

obscuritas: zulma I 122b, II 34b, 107a, 119b, 123a 

obscurus: muzliml7ib, 123b 

obscurus: mughdir I 67b 

observare: taharra III 26b 

obturans: satir II 45a 

obturatus: mustatir II 45a 

occultare: akhfa I 72b 

occultatio: iltibas I 127b 

occultus: khafT II 108b, 147b 

occulta: athar khafiyya II 148b 
oculus: basar I 67b, 72b, 1 10b 
oculus: 'ayn I 81a, II 142b 
totus oculus: jumlat al-'ayn I 79b, II 2b 
omnia: jamf al-ma'ani I 95a 
omnia ista: jami* hadhihi al-ma'anl I 95b 
operans: mu’aththir I 107a 
operare: aththara I 68b, III 15a 
operare in sensum: aththara fi al-hiss III 5b 
operatio: ta’thir I 90b, 105b, 107b 
opinabilis: maznun I 105b 
opinari: akhadha II 100b 
opinari: ra’a II 134b 
opinari: i'taqada II 49a 
opinio: madhhab I 105a 
opinio: ra’y I 105a 
oportere: lazima I 114b 
oppilatio: sadda I 85b, mb 
opponere: qabala II 89a 
opponi: qabala I 83b, II 119a 
oppositio: muhadhah II 61b 


oppositio: muqabala II 60b, III 2b 
oppositio directa: muwajaha II 64b 
oppositio facialis: muwajaha III 29b 
oppositio recta: muwajaha II 64b 

in fine directae oppositionis ad visum: fi ghayat al-muwajaha li-l-basar II 66a 

verticatio oppositionis: samt al-muwajaha II 62b 

oppositus: muqabil III 5a 

directe oppositus: muwajih II 75b, 105b 

esse oppositum: qabala II 133a 

esse oppositum: waliya II 79a 

opus: fasl II 130a 

ordinare: rattaba 185b 

ordinatio: tartlb I 107a, II 60b, 12 ia, III 3 b 

ordo: tartib III 3 b 

tinctura similis colori origani: (lawn) misanni I 128a 

oriri: ashraqa I 68a, 106b 

ortus: mansha’ I 74b 

os: 'azm I 73a 

os: fam II 126b 

palmus: shibr II 94b 
palpebra: jafn I 81 a, II 47b 
pannus: thawb I 72a 
paratus: mutahayyi’ I 105b 
paries: jidar I 1 15a 
pars: juz’ 

pars post aliam: juz’an ba'da juz’ II 47b 
maior pars totius rei visae: jumhur jumlat al-mubsar II 103a 
in maiori parte: fi al-akthar I 124b, II 100b 

comprehendet ipsam secundum singulas partes: adrakahu juz’anjuz’an II 
partes parvae: ajza’ sighar II 95a 
pars:jiha II 48b 

in parte: fi al-jiha III 5a, 21b 
consimilis in parte: mutashabih fi al-jiha III 6b 
in parte rei visae: yali al-mubsar II 52a 
in parte visus: minima yali al-basar III 19b 
ad unam partem: ila jiha wahida III 5a 
pars: qism III 21b 

in maiori parte: fi akthar al-ahwal II 27a 
particularism uz’I II 34b 
parvitas: sighar II 46b 
parvus: saghlr II 25a 
parvus: yasir I 71b, III 21a 

parvae quantitatis: saghlr al-hajm III 8a 
in tempore valde parvo: fi zaman fi ghayat al-sighar II 25a 
passio: infi'al 1 117a, II 150a, III 4a 
patiens: muta’aththir 1 1 18a 
patior: infa'ala 1 105b 

paulatim et paulatim: qalilan qalTlan III 32b 
pavo: tawus 1 72a 

se mutuo penetrantes: mutadakhilan III 16b 
penna: risha I 72a 
perceptio: mushahada II 141a 



192 


Glossary 


Latin-Arabic 


193 


percipere: ahassa II 70b, III 2a, 3 a 
percipere: ra’a II 140b 
percipere: shahada II 140b, 141a 
percipere: 'alima III 2b 
perfectio: tamam wa kamal II 127b 
pergamenum: qirtas III 28b 
permixtus: mumtazij I 107a 
perpendicular is: 'amud I 97b, III 5a 
perpendicularis: qa’im III 27a 
pertransire: j a waza I 94a, II 93a 
pertransire: qata'a II 114a 
pertransire: marra II 14a 
pertransire: nafadha I 82b 
pervenire (ad): balagha I 94a 
pervenire: hasala II 8b, 84a 
pervenire ad visum: hasala fi al-basar II 20a 
pervenire (ad): sara (ila) II 93a 
pervenire (ad): intaha (ila) III 11b, III 12a 
pervenire (ad, in): wasala (ila) I 83b, II 1 1 5a 
perventus: husul I 108b 
pes: rijl II 147a 
pes: qadam II 91a 

per phantasiam: bi-al-badlha II 151b 
secundum phantasiam: bi-al-badlha II 151a 
picturae: nuqush II 34a, 123b, 125a, 149b, III 15a 
picturae: wushum II 97a 

picturae et sculpturae: nuqush wa tazayin II 149b 

pinguedo: shahma I 73 b 

planities: istiwa’ II 79a 

planities: malasa II 1 1 6b 

planities frontis: tatamun al-jabha II 126a 

plantae: riyad II 122a 

plantes: thimar II 22b 

planus: musattah II 6b 

planus: amlas II 115a, III 2b 

planus et aequalis: amlas III 17b 

in pluribus positionibus: 'ala akthar al-awda* III 3 b 

polygonum: shakl kathir al-adla' III 2a 

ponere pupillam circa: haddaqa ila III 19a 

pori: masamm II 1 1 6a 

portio: qit'a II 88a 

positio: muqaddama II 25b 

per manifestationem positionum illarum: li-zuhur muqaddamatiha II 25b 
positio: wad' III 3 b 

positio consimilis: wad' mutashabih III 3b 

positio di versa: wad' mukhtalif III 3 b 

positio facialis: muwajaha III 33a 

in pluribus positionibus: 'ala akthar al-awda' III 3 b 

positus super tabulam: qa’im 'ala al-lawh III 19b 

posse: sahha II 4b 

posse: amkana I 1 17a 

possibilis: mumkin II 1 50a 

praeeminentia: shukhus II 72b 


praeparatus: mutahayyi’ 1 118a, II 150a 
praesens: hadir II 23a 

praesens memoriae: hadir li-l-dhikr II 23a 

praeservare: taharra III 27a 

praeter: siwa III 22a 

praeter: ma siwa I 89b 

praeterea: ma'a dhalik II 134a 

in praeteritis: ft ma taqaddam III 4b 

praeterito tempore: 'ala marr al-zaman II 33b 

principium: ibtida’ II 33b 

principium: mabda’ I 119b, II 143b 

in principio quiescentiae [sic] hominis: fi awwal al-nushu’ II 93b 

principium incrementi: mabda’ al-nushu’ II 143b 

principium sensus: ibtida’ ai-hiss II 6b 

privatio: 'adam II 48b, 109a 

privatio lucis: 'adam al-daw’ I 127a 

probare: i'tabara 1115b 

profundatio: ghu’ur II 72b 

profunditas: 'umq II 75a 

profunditas: ghu’ur II 116a 

profundum: 'umq I 75b 

profundus: gha’ir II 79b, 123b 

partes profundae: ajza’ gha’ira II 115a 
prohibere: dafa'a I 106b 
prohibere: 'aqa I 69a, 72b, 120a 
prominens:jahiz II 123b 
prominens: shakhis II 79b 

partes prominentes: al-ajza’ al-shakhisa II 114b 
prominentia: shukhus II 116a 
prominentia frontis: nutu* al-jabha II 126a 
promittere: damina I 124b 
prooemium: sadr III ib 
prope: qarlban II 81b 
propinquitas: taqarub III 24a 
propinquus: qarib II 95b 

(duo individua) proinqua: (shakhsan) mutaqariban III 20a 
propinquorum diametrorum: mutaqarib al-aqtar III 8a 
esse propinquum: waliya III 15a 
proportio: nisba II 98b, III 32a 
proportionalis: mutanasib wa muta’allif II 125b 
est proportionalis ad: yakunu bi-hasab III 33a 
proportionalitas: tanasub II 125a, 126b 
proportionem habere: nasaba II 126a 

habens proportionem sensibilem: lahu nisba mahsusa II 98b 

habet proportionem . . . et est asymmetrus: yanasibu . . . wa yubayinu (al-shay’a) II 125b 
secundum unam proportionem: mutanasib II 121b 
propositio: muqaddama II 27b 

propositio minor particulars: muqaddama juz’iyya II 29a 
propositio prima: 'ilm awwal II 29a 
propositiones primae: 'ulum uwal II 28a 
propositio universalis: muqaddama kulliyya II 29a 
proprietas: khassa I 76a, II 5b 
ex proprietate lucis: min khassat al-daw’ I 82a 


194 


Glossary 


Latin-Arabic 


195 


proprius: makhsus I 98a, 120b 
propter: min ajl II 8b, III 7b 
propter hoc: li-hadhihi al-'illa II 30b, 143 b 
pueritia: tufuliyya II 143 b 
pulcher: mustahsan II 121a 
pulchritudo: husn II 34b, 120a 

pulchritudinem facere: fa'ala al-husna II i2ob~i28b passim 
pul vis: ghubar I 129a 
punctum: nuqta II 47b, III 5b 

punctum carens quantitate: nuqta la misaha laha II 45b 
pyramidalis: munkharit I 8 1 a 
pyramidalitas: inkhirat II 123b 

secundum pyramidalitatem et amplificationem: 'ala inkhiratin wa ittisa'in I 75a 
quasi pyramidaliter: munkharitan III 18a 
pyramidatio: inkhirat III 10a 

locus pyramidationis duorum nervorum: mawdi' inkhirat al-'asabatayn III 10a 
pyramis: makhrut I 106b, II 8 1 b. III 4b 
pyramis radialis: makhrut al-shu'a* III 4b 

quadratum: shakl murabba' III 2a 

quadrilaterum: shakl murabba' II 83a 

quadrilaterus: murabba' II 83a 

quadrupes: dhu al-arba' II 145b 

quaerere: talaba II 139b 

quaerere: hamma II 134a 

quaestio: da'wa I 98b 

qualitas: kayfiyya II 112a 

qualitas motus: kayfiyyat al-haraka II 112a 

qualiter fiat visio: kayfa yakunu al-ibsar II lb 

quantitas: hajm III 6b 

quantitas: qadr II 45b 

quantitas: miqdar II 52a, II 8 1 a 

quantitas: misaha II 45b 

punctum carens quantitate: nuqta la qadra laha II 47b 

punctum carens quantitate: nuqta la misaha laha II 45b 

alicuius quantitatis: lahu qadr II 54b 

alicuius quantitatis: muqtadir II 145a 

alicuius quantitatis: muqtadir al-hajm III 6b 

magnae quantitatis: fasih al-aqtar II 133a 

pars alicuius quantitatis: juz’ lahu qadr II 45b 

pars alicuius quantitatis: juz 9 muqtadir I 95b 

parvae quantitatis: saghlr al-hajm III 8a 

sphaera alicuius bonae quantitatis: kura muqtadira II 6b 

quanto: kulla-ma III 27b 

quantum ad sensum: bi-al-qiyas ila al-hiss III 5a, 13b 
quidditas: ma’iyya II 24b, 99a, 139a 
quies: sukun II 114b, 122b 
quiescere: istaqarra II 38a, 139a 

quietus in imaginatione: mustaqirr fi al-takhayyul II 99a 
quod est res visa: ma’iyyat al-mubsar II 49b 

alio modo ab eo quod est: 'ala khilaf mi huwa 'alayh (al-shay*) III 2a 
color in eo quod est color: al-lawn bi-ma huwa lawn II ^5 
lux in eo quod est lux: al-daw’ bi-ma huwa daw’ II 44b 


secundum quod est: 'ala ma huwa 'alayh (al-shay*) III ib 
quomodo: kayfa II 134b, III 3a 

radius: shu'a' 1 100b 

ponentes radios exire a visu: ashab al-shu'a* 1 100b 
radix: asl II 84a 

radix comprehensionis colons: asl idrak al-lawn II 39b 

raro: qalla ma II 25b, 70a 

raro: nadiran III 23b 

raro: yasiran II 41b 

rarus: khafTf 1 130a 

rarus: sakhif I 73b, 130a 

rarus: qalll I 123a 

ratio: istidlal II 22a 

ratio: qiyas I 105a, II 22a* 23b, 24b, 27a, III 23b 
ratio: cf. comprehensio 
in ratione: ft al-qiyas III 1 b 

ratione et argumentation: bi-al-qiyas wa al-tamyiz II 84a 
ratione et experientia: bi-al-qiyas wa al-i'tibar III 23b 
ratiocinari: ihtajja II 49a 
ratiocinatio: qiyas II 23a 

per aliquam modorum ratiocinationis: bi-darb min durub al-qiyas II 23a 
recedere: ghaba II 148b 
receptio: qabtil I 98b, 1 14b 

receptione ad alterandum: qabula istihalatin I 1 14b 

receptione ad reddendum: qabula ta’diyatin I 1 14b, II 7a 

secundum receptionem sensus: qabula ihsasin II 7a 

recessere: insarafa I 68a 

recessus: insiraf 1 1 17a 

recipere: qabila 1 114b 

recte: 'ala istiqama I 86a, III 2a 

rectitudo: istiqama II 103a 

secundum recti tudinem: 'ala istiqama I 88a 
rectus: sahih 1 105a 
rectus: mustaqim I 91a 

linea recta elevata super superficiem: khatt qa*im 'ala sath I 88a 
reddere: adda I 114b 
reflectio: in'ikas II 62b 
refractio: in'itaf I 87b, II 5b, 8a 
refractus: mun'atif I 90b 

lineae refractae: khutut mun'atifa II 5a 
refringi: in'atafa I 89b, II 5a 
remanere: baqiya 1 103a 
rememoratio: tadhakkur II 23a 
remotio: bu'd 1 75b, II nb 
remotio: cf. accessio 

in maxima remotione: min al-bu'd al-ba'Id al-mutafawit II 107a 
a remotissimo: min al-bu'd al-mutafawit III 2b 
a remotissimo intervallo: min bu'd mutafawit III 2b 
remotus: mutaba'id III 20a 
remotus: mutafawit III 2a 

a remoto: min al-bu'd al-mutafawit III 2a 

per spatium remotum: 'ala bu'd mutafawit III 2a 


20 



196 


Glossary 


Latin-Arabic 


197 


remotus in fortitudine: mufrit fi al-quwwa I 128a 

res: ma'na I 95a, 105a, 113a, II 19b, 49a 

res sentiens: al-'udw al-hass II 6b 

res subtiles: al-ma'anl al-latifa I 69a 

res visibiles: al-ma'ani al-mubsara II 22a 

residens in anima: hasil fi al-nafs II 142b 

residuum: baqiyya II 103b 

respectu: bi-al qiyas ila I 127b, II 1 10a 

respectu eorum inter se: min qiyas ba'diha bi-ba'd I 128b 

respectu sensu: bi-al-qivas ila al-hiss II 46b 

in respectu: bi-al-qivas ila III 5a 

in respectu corporum caelestium: qiyasan 'ala al-ajram al-samawiyya II 53b 

respicere: samata II 52a 

respicere: wattara (orawtara) II 81b, 95b 

respiciens: musamit II 90a, 95b 

respiciens distandam: musamit li-l-tafarruq II 108b 

quod respicit remotionem: musamit Ii- 1 -bu'd II 52a 

respondens: nazir I 8 1 a 

retendo: tamasuk II 3 5a 

retineri: indabata I 129a 

revertere: raja'a II 120b 

revertere: 'ada 185b, II 149a 

revertere: a'ada III 20a 

reverti: 'ada II 61a 

reverti: takarrara II 84b 

revertitur ad visum: yatakarrar 'ala al-basar II 84b 

revolutio: dawra II 43 b 

roseus: wardlll 121a, 145b 

color roseus: tawrid II 145b 

rotunditas: istidara I 130a, II 125a 

rotundus: mustadlr II 123b 

rubeus: ahmar II 39a 

rubeus: atjawani (or urjuwani) I 68b 

rugae: ghudun II 121a, 123a 

salus: saiama 185b 
schedula: juzaza III 26a 
scientia: ma'rifa II 142a 
scientia: 'ilm III 2b 
scientia: cf cognido 

scientia antecedens: taqaddum al-'ilm II 108 a 

scientia praecedens: taqaddum al-ma'rifa II 140a 

cum scientia praecedente: ma'a taqaddum al-ma'rifa II 140b, 142a 

per scientiam antecedentem: bi-taqaddum al-'ilm II 77b 

scintillans: mushriq I 123a, II 120b 

color scintillans: lawn mushriq I 71b, II 120b 

scintillatio lucis: bariq al-daw’ wa lama'anuh II 117a 

scire: 'alima II 109a, III 2b 

scriptor: katib II 143 a 

scriptural khatt I 71a 

scriptura subtilis: huruf al-kitaba II 131a 

scripturae: huruf al-kitaba II 124a 

sculptura: khatt I 70a 


sculptura: naqsh I 69b, 71a 

sculptura subtilis: naqsh daqiq I 69a 

sculpturae et scripturae subtiles: khatt daqiq I 71a 

per se: min dhatih II 40a 

per se: munfaridan II 98b, 120b 

secans: qati' III 23b 

lineae secantes: khutut mutaqati'a 1115a 

secare: fassala II 51a 

secare: qata'a I 92a 

sectio: taqatu' I 76b, 94b 

semper: abadan III 22a 

semper: da’iman II 90a 

sensibilis: hassas III 4a 

sensibilis: mahsus I 103b, III 28a 

differentia sensibilis: lkhtilaf mahsus III 8a 

virtus sensitiva: ai-quwwa al-hassasa II 36a 

sensus: hiss II 24b 

solo sensu: bi-mujarrad al-hiss II 20a 
sensu spoliato: bi-mujarrad al-hiss I 105a 
principium sensus: ibtida’ al-hiss II 6b 
quantum ad sensum: fi al-hiss III 26b 
virtus sensus: quwwat al-hiss II 24b 
sensus: ihsas I 1 1 ia 

solo sensu: bi-mujarrad al-ihsas II 40a 
ultimus sensus: akhir al-ihsas I 108 a 
sensus: al-hass II 64a 
sensus: hassa II 92a 
sensus visus: hassat al-basar II 92a 

sentiens: al-hass I 109a, nob, II 41b, 44b, 133b, 134b, III 12b 

sentiens: al-jism al-hass 1 97b 

sentiens: al-'udw al-hass I 100b 

corpus sentiens: al-jism al-hass II 7a, 9a, 36a, 40a 

membrum sentiens: al-hass II 128a 

membrum sentiens: al-'udw al-hass II 2a, 36a 

res sentiens: al-'udw al-hass II 6b 

sentiens ultimum: al-hass al-akhir I 108a 

sentire: ahassa II 91a 

separari: ghaba II 22b 

separatio: cf. discretio 

separatus: mutafarriq II 72b 

stellae separatae: al-kawakib al-mutafarriqa II 122a 
sequens: alladhi yall II 45a, 103b 
sequens visum: yali al-basar II 67a 
sequi: lazima II 10b 

sequitur: lazim fi III 26a 
sequitur ex hoc: yalzamu min dhalik II 10b 
sequi: waliya II 92b 
sermo: 'ilm II 138a 
sermo: qawl I 1 17a 
siccitas: yubs 1 129b 
siccus: yabis II 35a 
signatio: istidlal II 22a 
significare: dalla I 72a 


Glossary 


Latin-Arabic 


199 


198 

signification dalll II 31a, 137a 
signification istidlal II 101b 
significatio: cf. argumentum 

significatio manifesta est: minima yadullu dalllan wadihan I mb 
significatio super hoc . . . est: alladhi yadullu 'ala II 136a 
accipit significationem super quantitatem magnitudinis: yastadillu 'ala miqdar al-'izam 
II 99b 

accipit significationem super quantitatem remotionis ex quantitate magnitudinis: 

yastadillu 'ala miqdar al-bu'd bi-miqdar al-'izam II 99b 
per significationem: bi-al-istidlal II 10 ib 
signum: amara I 105a, II 23b, 54a, 100a 
est signum quod: dalla dhalika 'ala anna I 109b 
similis: shabih I 8 1 a 
similis: nazir I 127b 
simitas in naso: fatasa fi al-anf II 142b 
simitas nasi: qana (mss. qnw) al-anf II 125b 
simplex: mufrad II 127b 

quia rotunditas est simplicissima figurarum: li-i'tidal al-istidara I 130a 
simul: dar atan wahidatan II 45a 
simul: ma'an II 109b 
simultotam: ma'a dhalik II 104b 
singularis: mujarrad 'ala infiradih I 124b 
singulariter: munfaridan I 125b 
sinister: mutayasir III 24b 
in sinistro: mutayasir III 19b 
situs: hal III 20b 
in illo situ: f! tilka al-hal III 20b 
situs: nusba II 61a, 136b, III 27b 
situs: wad' I 115a 

illud habens situm: dhalik al-mawdu' II 61a 
solus: mujarrad II 40b 

solo sensu: bi-mujarrad al-hiss II 20a, 40a 
spatium: bu'd III 2a 
spatium: masafa 1 75a, II 48b, 60b, 1 1 ia 
spatium: cf remotio 

spatium aliquantulum: masafa muqtadira I 75a 
spatium latum: masafa mu'tarida II 1 1 ia 
per spatium remotum: 'ala bu'd mutafawit III 2a 
specialitas: naw'iyya II 145a 
specialiter: bi-al-naw' II 141b 

specialiter et secundum individuum: bi-al-naw' wa bi-al-shakhs II 141b 
species: naw' II 138b, 140a, 140b 

formae specierum: suwar anwa’ (al-ashya’) II 140b 
species: naw'iyya II 145b 
species rei visae: naw'iyyat al-mubsar II 144a 
speculum: mir’ah 1 67a 
sphaera: kura I 76a 
sphaericus: kuri II 6a 
spiritus: ruh 1 74b, II 9a 
spiritus visibilis: al-ruh al-basira I 74b, II 36a 
spissitudo: sumk I 75b 
spissitudo: ghilaz I 74a, 125a, II 34b 
spissitudo: kathafa II 1 17b, 1 19a 


aliqua spissitudo: ba'd al-ghilaz I 124b 

cum eo quod est ex eo de spissitudine: bi-ma fihi min al-ghilaz 1 106b 
modica spissitudo: ghilaz yasir I 125a 
spissus: safiq I 130a 

stans statu aequali: qa’imun qiyaman mu'tadilan III 18b 

statim: bi-al-badiha II 29a 

statim: fi al-hal II 70b 

in hoc statu: fi tilka al-hal III 19a 

in illo statu: fi tilka al-hal III 16a 

statui: hasala III 7a 

Stella: kawkab II 122a, III 2b 

stellae extensae: latakhat II 122a 

stellae galaxiae: majarra II 122a 

strictus: dayyiq I 1 19b, II 126b 

distinctio stricta: tafarruq dayyiq II 108b 
subtendere: wattara (orawtara) III 6a, 33b 
subtilia: al-ma'ani al-ltifa I 69a 
subtilis: tarif 1 130a, 130b 
subtilis: muharrar I 95a 
subtilis: daqiq I 71a, II 121a 

intentiones subtiles: al-ma'ani al-daqiqa II 121a 
subtilis: latif I 108a, II 62a 

corpus subtile: al-jism al-iatif II 9b 
intentiones subtiles: al-ma'ani al-latifa II 97a 
color subtilis: lawn raqlq II 41a 
subtilitas nasi: diqqat al-anf II 126a 
successive: juz’an ba'dajuz’ II 45b 
sufTficere: qana'a II 142a 
sufficere: kafa II 147b 
supercilium: hajib II 124a 
superficies: tastih I 77a 
superius: murtafi* II 72b 
superius: min qabl II 133a 
superponi: intabaqa III 1 ib 
supponi: intabaqa II 103b 
sustentari: 'awwala II 81b 
sustentatio: mu'awwal II 70a, 83b, 139a 

secundum suum esse: 'ala ma huwa 'alayh (al-shay’) I 86b, II 6b, 97a 
syllogismus: qiyas II 29a 

tabula: lawh III 17b 
tactus: lams II 9a 
tardissimus: musrif al-but* III 2b 
tardus: bati’ II 44a 

tela valde rara: ghisha* fi ghayat al-khiffa 1 130a 

quia magis temperata figurarum est sphaerica: li-anna al-kura a'dal al-ashkal 
al-mujassama I 130a 

tempore aliquanto: zamanan mahsusan II 117b 
in tempore alicuius quantitatis: fi zaman lahu qadr II 147b 
in tempore parvo: fi zaman yasir II 147a 
in minimo tempore: fi zaman yasir al-miqdar II 44b 
longo tempore: muddatan II 22b 

secundum transitum temporis: 'ala marr al-zaman II 91b 


200 


Glossary 


Latin-Arabic 


201 


secundum transitum temporis: bi-murur ai-zaman II 148b 
tempus: zaman II 91b 
corde tenere: hafiza II 138a 

pupillam super ipsum tenere: haddaqa lla (al-shay*) III 18b 

tenuis: raqlq I 74b, 129b 

tenuitas: riqqa I 74b 

terminus: nihaya II 60b 

terra: ard II 90a 

tersus: saqil I 67a, II 1 16b 

testa: ghisha’ I 70b 

tinctura: sibgh I 99b, II 52b 

tinctura fortis: sibgh qawl I 99b 

?tinctura obscura: kuhll I 128a 

tinctura similis colori origani: (lawn) misannl I 128a 

tincturae lucidae: asbagh mushriqa III 17b 

colores et tincturae: al-alwan wa al-asbagh I 121b 

tingere: sabagha I 1 17a 

tortuosus: muta'arrij I 98a 

totusrjumla I 79b, II 133b 

totus oculus:jumlat al-'ayn II 2b 

secundum se totum: bi-jumlat (al-shay*) I 79b 
transferri: intaqala II 103 b, III 7b 
transire: jawaza I 86a 
transire: marra I 78b, II 2b, 88a, 147b 
transire: nafadha 182b 
transitus: murur II 148b 
transmutabilis: mutaghayyir III 9a 
triangulum: muthallath III 6b 
trochus: duwwama II 42b, 43 b 
tunc: cf et tunc 
tunica: tabaqa I 98a 
(color) turbidus: (lawn) kadir I 71b 
turpis: qablh II 123b 

turpem reddere: shana II 123a 
turpitudo: qubh II 34b, 128b 

turpitudinem facere: shana II 121a 

in fine turpi tudinis: fi ghayat al-qubh II 123b 


ubitas: jiha II 64b, 1 1 ia 
in ultimo spatii: 'ala bu'd mutafawit II 96a 
ultimum illius diametri: akhir dhaiik al-qutr II 103 b 
ultra: min wara* III 19b 

quod est ultra ipsum: ma wara* (al-shay’) II 1 1 8a 

umbra: zill I 122a, II 34b, 1 14b, 119a 

forma universalis: sura kulliyya II 34a 

universaliter: bi-al-jumla III 4a, 34a 

universaliter non determinate: bi-qawl mujmal III 3b 

universum duarum formarum: jumiat al-suratayn III 7b 

unum post aliud: wahidan ba'da wahid II 49a 

utilitas: manfa'a 1 128b 

uvea: 'inabiyya (i.e. al-tabaqa al-\) I 76a 


vacuitas: fada* II 54a, 108b 

valde: fi al-ghaya I 129b 

velle: arada II 147b 

velocitas: sur'a II 103b 

valde velox: £1 ghayat al-sur'a II 103b 

venire: sara ila III 22b 

venire: warada II 37b 

verba gratia: mithal dhaiik II 88a 

vere: 'ala al-tahqlq II 57a 

opinio verificantium: ra’y al-muhassilln I 105a 

verificari: tahaqqaqa III 16b 

verificatus: muhaqqaq II 59a, III 14a 

veritas: haqlqa II 142a 

veritas rei visae: haqiqat al-mubsar II 151b 

secundum veritatem: 'ala al-tahrir II 62a 

secundum veritatem: 'ala al-tahqiq II 104b 

in fine veritatis: 'ala ghayat ma yasihh II 135a 

versus: adab II 138a 

vertere: radda III 30a 

vertex: ra’s 1 106a, III 4b 

vertex pyramidis: ra’s al-makhrut 191a, 106a 

verticatio: samt I 125a, III 26b, 30a 

verticatio facialis: samt al-muwajaha III 26b, 30a 

verticatio pyramidis: samt al-makhrut I 91b 

in verticatione: musamit III 21a 

super unam verticationem: 'ala samt wahid I 125a 

verus: muhaqqaq I 95a, II 53a 

vera comprehensione et certificata: idrakan muhaqqaqan 'ala al-tahrir II 63 b 
verus: mutayaqqan II 52b 
in prima vice: fi al-hala al-ula II 23a 
prima vice: fi awwali marra II 137a 
vicinans: mujawir 1 126b 
vicinans: alladhl yall II 45a 
vicinitas: mujawara 1 127b 

victoria formarum lucis fortis: istizhar suwar al-adwa’ al-qawiyya 1 128b 
videre: ra‘a II 89a 
videre: shahada II 136b 
vigor: quwwa II 1 52b 

secundum vigorem et debilitatem: fi al-quwwa wa al-da'f II 152b 

color fortis vincet debilem: istazhara al-lawn al-qawi 'ala al-da'If II 121a 

forte vincet: mustazhira (said of the form of light 1 ) I 122a 

vinosus: khamri 171a 

vinum: sharab khamri 1 71b 

viridia: riyad II 121a 

viridis: zar'I II 120b 

viridis (sir): azraq 1 73b 

viridis levistici: akhdar fustuqi II 21a 

viridis myrti: akhdar zinjari II 21a 

color viridis segetalis: akhdar zar'I 1 128a 

viriditas: khudra II 146a 

viriditas profunda et fuscitas: al-kuhll wa al-khamri wa al-misannl II 41a 

virtus: quwwa I io8a, II 24b 

virtus cognitionis: quwwat al-ma'rifa II 24b 


202 


Glossary 


virtus distinctiva: al-quwwa al-mumayyiza II 25b 

virtus recipiens: al-quwwa al-qabila I 107a, II 8a 

virtus sensibilis: al-quwwa al-hassasa I 107a, II 7a, III 4a 

virtus sensitiva: al-quwwa al-hassasa II 36a 

virtus sensus: quwwat al-hiss II 24b 

virtus sentiens: al-quwwa al-hassasa II 47a 

virtus sentium: al-quwwa al-hassa I 108a 

virtus visibilis: al-quwwa ai-basira I 75a 

res visa: al-mubsar I 108a 

visibilis: basir I 75a 

visibilis: mubsar II 97a 

visio: ibsar I 99b 

visio: mushahada II 150b 

visio: mulahaza II 130b 

visas: basar 

visus: ibsar I 85b 

humor vitreus: al-zujajiyya ( i.e . ai-rutuba al-z.) I 74a 
vitrum quasi frusta turn: al-zujaj al-mardud I 74a 


CONCORDANCE 


Concordance 


205 


Concordance of the Arabic, Latin 
and English Versions of the Optics, 

Books I— III 

References to the Arabic and English versions are by page numbers of 
volumes I— III in the 'Askari copy of Kitdb al-Mandzir (i.e. MSS Fatih 3212, 
3213 and 3214); these numbers appear in the margins of my edition of the 
Arabic text and of the English translation. References to Risner’s edition of the 
medieval Latin translation are by page and line, or by chapter, section and 
page (see Introduction, sec. VII). 


BOOK I 


Arabic Text 

Risner's Edition 

I 84a 

7:58 



I 84b 

8: 5 

I ib— 66b 

— 

I 85a 

8:17 

I 67a 

1: 1 

I 85b 

8:29 

I 67b 

1:19 

I 86a 

8:40 

I 68a 

1:31 

I 86b 

8:51 

I 68b 

1:43 

I 87a 

8:62 

I 69a 

2: 4 

I 87b 

9:15 

I 69b 

2:14 

I 88a 

9:27 

I 70a 

2:25 

I 88b 

9:41 

I 70b 

2:34 

I 89a 

9:52 

I 71a 

2:45 

I 89b 

10: 2 

I 71b 

2:58 

I 90a 

10:13 

I 72a 

3: 7 

I 90b 

10:23 

I 72b 

3:19 

I 91a 

10:36 

I 73a 

3:34 

I 91b 

10:48 

I 73 b 

3:47 

I 92a 

10:59 

I 74a 

3:58 

I 92b 

11: 7 

I 74b 

4: 8 

I 93 a 

1 1:18 

I 75a 

4:19 

1 93b 

11:30 

I 75b 

4:33 

1 94a 

11:42 

1 76a 

4:49 

1 94b 

11:54 

1 76b 

5: 3 

i 95a 

12: 1 

1 77a 

5:18 

1 95b 

12:12 

1 77b 

5:30 

I 96a 

12:23 

1 78a 

5:40 

I 96b 

12:35 

1 78b 

5:47 

I 97a 

12:47 

1 79a 

5:59 

1 97b 

12:60 

1 79b 

6:12 

1 98a 

13: 8 

1 80a 

6:26 

1 98b 

13:19 

1 80b 

6:42 

1 99a 

13:32 

I 81a 

7: 2 

r 99b 

13:45 

I 81b 

7:14 

1 100a 

13:54 

I 82a 

7:15 

1 1 00 b 

14: 2 

I 82b 

7:27 

1 101a 

14:12 

I 83a 

7.39 

1 101b 

14:25 

I 83b 

7:48 

1 102a 

14:26 


206 


Concordance 


Concordance 


207 


1 102b 

14:31 


I I22a 

1 103a 

14:36 


I I22b 

1 103b 

14:45 


I I23a 

1 104a 

14:53 


I I23b 

1 104b 

14:63 


I I24a 

I 105a 

15: 7 


I I24b 

1 105b 

15:18 


I I25a 

1 1 06a 

15:27 


I I25b 

1 1 06b 

15:34 


I 126a 

1 107a 

15:46 


I 126b 

1 107b 

15:57 


I 127a 

I 108a 

16: 4 


I 127b 

I 108b 

16:10 


I 128a 

I 109a 

16:21 


I 128b 

I 109b 

16:24 


I 129a 

I 1 10a 

16:33 


I 129b 

I nob 

16:38 


I 130a 

I 11 ia 

16:45 


I 130b 

I mb 

16:48 


I 131a 

I 1 12a 

16:55 


I 131b 

I 112b 

16:58 


I 132a 

I 113a 

16:60 


I 132b 

I 113b 

17: 2 


I 133a 

I 114a 

17: 6 


I 133b 

I 1 14b 

17: 7 


I I34a 

I 115a 

17:18 


I 134b 

I 1 15b 

17:27 


I 135a 

I 116a 

17:31 


I 135b 

I 1 16b 

17:34 


I 136a 

I 117a 

17:39 


I 136b 

I 117b 

17:49 


I 137a 

I 1 1 8a 

17:59 


I 137b (blank) 

I 1 1 8b 

18: 2 


I 138a 

I 1 19a 

18: 7 


I 138b 

I 119b 

18:15 


I i39a 

I 1 20a 

18:22 


I 139b 

I 120b 

18:31 


I 140a 

I 121a 

18:42 


I 140b 

I 121b 

18:53 

BOOK II 

I 141a 

Arabic Text 

Risner's Edition 

II 5b 

II 6a 

II 1 a (title page) 

— 


II 6b 

II ib 

00 

■4 

fN 


II 7a 

II 2a 

24:15 


II 7b 

II 2b 

24:31 


II 8a 

II 3a 

24:41 


II 8b 

II 3b 

24:50 


II 9a 

II 4a 

25:12 


II 9b 

II 4b 

25:19 


II 10a 

II 5a 

25.29 


II 10b 


18:59 II 

19: 6 II 

19:16 II 

I9'2I II 

19:28 II 

19:35 II 

19:45 II 

19:55 II 

19:62 II 

20: 3 II 

20:12 II 

20:20 II 

20:27 II 

20:35 II 

20:46 II 

20:54 II 

20:59 II 

21: 6 II 

21:12 II 

21:20 II 

21:25 II 

21:32 II 

21:39 II 

21:48 II 

21:57 II 

22: I II 

22:14 II 

22:25 II 

22:35 II 

22:44 II 

22:57 II 

— II 

23: 5 II 

23:16 II 

23:28 II 

23:40 II 

23‘47 II 

23:58 II 

24: 5-7 II 

II 

II 

II 

25:34 II 

25:43 II 

25:56 II 

26: 5 II 

26:18 II 

26:20 II 

26:30 II 

26:39 II 

26:49 II 

26:61 II 

27:11 II 


na 

27:21 

11 37b 

35: 1 

1 1 b 

27:34 

11 38a 

35:u 

12a 

27:45 

11 38b 

35:i9 

12b 

27:61 

11 39a 

35:27 

13a 

28:10 

11 39b 

35:40 

13b 

28:23 

II 40a 

35:48 

14a 

28:33 

II 40b 

35:59 

14b 

28:44 

II 41a 

36:11 

1 5a 

28:60 

II 41b 

36:21 

15b 

29: 5 

II 42a 

36:31 

1 6a 

29:21 

II 42b 

36:40 

16b 

29:30 

11 43a 

36:48 

17a 

29:42 

11 43b 

36:59 

17b 

29:48 

11 44a 

37: 9 

18a 

29:54 

11 44b 

37:20 

18b 

29:62 

11 45a 

37:31 

19a 

30: 9 

11 45b 

37:41 

19b 

30:12 

11 46a 

37:52 

20a 

30:21 

11 46b 

37:59 

20b 

30:30 

11 47a 

38: 6 

21a 

30:36 

11 47b 

38:16 

21b 

30:46 

11 48a 

38:26 

22a 

30:57 

11 48b 

38:36 

22b 

3i: 5 

II 49a 

38:49 

23a 

31:15 

II 49b 

39: 1 

23b 

31:23 

II 50a 

39:n 

24a 

3i:34 

II 50b 

39:24 

24b 

31:41 

II 51a 

39:34 

25a 

31:49 

II 51b 

39:47 

25b 

3i:55 

II 52a 

39:6 i 

26a 

32: 3 

II 52b 

40:12 

26b 

32: 4 

II 53a 

40:22 

27a 

32:11 

11 53b 

40:34 

27b 

32:18 

11 54a 

40:45 

28a 

32:23 

11 54b 

40:54 

28b 

32:33 

11 55a 

4i: 3 

29a 

32:42 

11 55b 

41:12 

29b 

32:49 

11 56a 

— 

30a 

32:56 

11 56b 

41:22 

30b 

33: 1 

11 57a 

41:26 

31a 

33:10 

11 57b 

4i:37 

31b 

33:18 

11 58a 

41:50 

32a 

33:22 

11 58b 

41:63 

32b 

33:32 

11 59a 

42: 9 

33a 

33:40 

11 59b 

42:18 

33b 

33:48 

II 60a 

42:25 

34a 

33:58 

II 60b 

42:34 

34b 

34:11 

II 61a 

42:46 

35a 

34:21 

II 61b 

42:60 

35b 

34:31 

II 62a 

43:10 

36a 

34:33 

II 62b 

43:21 

36b 

34:44 

II 63a 

43:32 

37a 

34:53 

II 63 b 

43:44 



208 


Concordance 


II 

64a 

43:56 

II 90b 

53:32 

II 

64 b 

44: 4 

II 91a 

53:43 

II 

65a 

44:19 

II 91b 

53:53 

II 

65b 

44:31 

II 92a 

54: 1 

II 

66a 

44:45 

II 92b 

54:12 

II 

66b 

44:57 

II 93a 

54:20 

II 

67a 

45: 4 

II 93b 

54:28 

II 

67b 

45:15 

II 94a 

54:37 

II 

68a 

45:28 

II 94b 

54:46 

II 

68b 

45HI 

II 95a 

54:52 

II 

69a 

45:53 

II 95b 

54:61 

II 

69 b 

46: I 

II 96a 

55: 9 

II 

70a 

46:14 

II 96b 

55:20 

II 

70b 

46:25 

II 97a 

55:32 

II 

71a 

46:36 

II 97b 

55:41 

II 

71b 

46:47 

II 98a 

55:49 

II 

72a 

46:61 

II 98b 

55:58 

II 

72b 

47: 9 

II 99a 

56: 6 

II 

73a 

47:21 

II 99b 

56:18 

II 

73b 

47:3i 

II 100a 

56:29 

II 

74a 

47:40 

II 100b 

56:39 

II 

74b 

47:54 

II 101a 

56:46 

II 

75a 

48: 3 

II 101b 

56:61 

II 

75b 

48:12 

II 102a 

57:10 

II 

76a 

48:19 

II 102b 

57:22 

II 

76b 

48:30 

II 103a 

57:36 

II 

77a 

48:38 

II 103b 

57:46 

II 

77b 

48:45 

II 104a 

57:58 

II 

78a 

48:58 

II 104b 

58:10 

II 

78b 

49: 6 

II 105a 

58:24 

II 

79a 

49:26 

II 105b 

58:36 

II 

79b 

49:43 

II 1 06a 

58:46 

II 

80a 

49:53 

II 106b 

59: 1 

II 

80b 

50: 8 

II 107a 

59: 8 

II 

81a 

50:18 

II 107b 

59:19 

II 

81b 

50:28 

II 108a 

59:32 

II 

82a 

50:38 

II 108b 

59:42 

II 

82b 

50:59 

II 109a 

59:54 

II 

83a 

5i: 5 

II 109b 

60: 3 

II 

83b 

51:13 

II noa 

60:16 

II 

84a 

51:23 

II nob 

60:27 

II 

84b 

51:32 

II ilia 

60:35 

II 

85a 

5i:45 

II mb 

60:45 

II 

85b 

5i:53 

II 112a 

60:55 

II 

86a 

52: 6 

II 112b 

61: 2 

II 

86b 

52:15 

II 113a 

61:11 

II 

87a 

52:26 

II 113b 

61:22 

II 

87b 

52:33 

II 114a 

61:32 

II 

88a 

52:43 

II 114b 

61:43 

II 

88b 

52:51 

II 115a 

61:54 

II 

89a 

52:59 

II 115b 

62: 4 

II 

89b 

53: 6 

II 116a 

62:11 

II 

90a 

53:18 

II 116b 

62:19 


Concordance 


209 


II 117a 

62:32 

11 135a 

68:40 

II 117b 

62:40 

11 135b 

68:53 

II 118a 

62:54 

II 136a 

68:63 

II 1 18b 

63: 3 

II 136b 

69:13 

II 119a 

63:11 

II 137a 

69:21 

II 119b 

63:21 

II 137b 

69:30 

II 120a 

63:32 

II 138a 

69:42 

II 120b 

63:44 

IIi38b 

69:50 

II 121a 

63:54 

II 139a 

70: 2 

II 121b 

64: 4 

II 139b 

70:16 

II 122a 

64:15 

II 140a 

70:29 

II 122b 

64:23 

II 140b 

70:43 

II 123a 

64:32 

II 141a 

70:54 

II 123b 

64:39 

II 141b 

7i: 4 

II 124a 

64:50 

II 142a 

71:17 

II 124b 

64:63 

II 142b 

71:36 

II 125a 

65:11 

II 143a 

71:49 

II 125b 

65:21 

II 143b 

7C59 

II 126a 

65:33 

II 144a 

72: 8 

II 126b 

65:44 

II 144b 

72:18 

II 127a 

65:54 

II 145a 

72:34 

II 127b 

65:61 

II 145b 

72:45 

II 128a 

66: 9 

II 146a 

72:59 

II 128b 

66:19 

II 146b 

73: 8 

II 129a 

66:33 

II 147a 

73:20 

II 129b 

66:44 

II 147b 

73:31 

II 130a 

66:55 

II 148a 

73:4i 

II 130b 

67:10 

II 148b 

73:53 

II 131a 

67:19 

II 149a 

74: 1 

II 131b 

67:29 

II 149b 

74:10 

II 132a 

67:36 

II 150a 

74:21 

II 132b 

67:45 

II 150b 

74:28 

II 133a 

67:55 

II 151a 

74:37 

11 133b 

68: 8 

II 151b 

74:51 

II 134a 

68:19 

II 152a 

74:62 

II 134b 

68:29 

II 152b 

75:10 


BOOK III, Chapters 

1-2 


Arabic Text 

Risner's Edition 

III 7a 

77:39 



III 7b 

77:49 

III 1 a (tide page) 

— 

III 8a 

77:61 

III ib 

75:i8 

III 8b 

78:12 

III 2a 

75:30 

III 9a 

78:31 

III 2b 

75:40 

III 9b 

78:54 

III 3 a 

75:50 

III 10a 

79: 7 

III 3 b 

7 6: 5 

III 10b 

79:17 

III 4a 

76:18 

III na 

79:29 

III 4b 

76:31 

III nb 

79:39 

III 5a 

76:40 

III 12a 

79:49 

III 5b 

76:56 

III 12b 

79:60 

III 6a 

77:11 

IIIi3a 

80: 6 

III 6b 

77:28 

III 13b 

80:19 


210 


Concordance 


III 14a 

80:27 

III 24a 

83:63 

III 14b 

80:35 

III 24b 

84:10 

III 15a 

80:45 

IIl25a 

84:22 

III 15b 

80:55 

IIl25b 

84:32 

III 1 6a 

81: 6 

III 26a 

84:42 

III 16b 

81:15 

III 26b 

84:50 

III 17a 

81:24 

III 27a 

84:60 

III 17b 

81:32 

III 27b 

85: 8 

III 18a 

81:49 

III 28a 

85:21 

III 1 8b 

82: 1 

11128b 

85:36 

III 19a 

82:1 1 

III 29a 

85:50 

III 19b 

82:19 

III 29b 

86: 1 

III 20a 

82:28 

III 30a 

86:12 

III 20b 

82:39 

III 30b 

86.22 

III 21a 

83: 1 

III 31a 

86:33 

III 2 1 b 

83: 9 

III 31b 

86:43 

III 22a 

83:18 

III 32a 

86:55 

III 22b 

83:29 

III 32b 

87: 2 

IIl23a 

83:44 

11133 a 

87:12 

III 23b 

83:53 

11133 b 

87:23 




BOOK III, Chapters 3-7 


Arabic Text 

Risner’s Edition 






III, Ch. 7, 129b 

III, Ch. 7, Sec. 45, p. 96 

III, Ch. 3, 

35 a 

III, Ch. 3, Sec. 18, p. 88 

131a 

Sec. 46, p. 97 

III, Ch. 4, 

48a 

III, Ch. 4, Sec. 19, p. 89 

131b 

Sec. 47, p. 97 

III, Ch. 5, 

53 a 

III, Ch. 5, Sec. 20, p. 89 

133b 

Sec. 48, p. 97 

III, Ch. 6, 

61b 

III, Ch. 6, Sec. 21, p. 90 

135b 

Sec. 49. p- 97 

III, Ch. 7, 

76b 

III, Ch. 7, Sec. 22, p. 91 

137a 

Sec. 50, p. 97 


77b 

Sec. 23, p. 92 

139a 

Sec. 51, p- 97 


79a 

Sec. 24, p. 92 

141b 

Sec. 52, p. 97 


81a 

Sec. 25, p. 92 

143a 

Sec. 53, p. 98 


84b 

Sec. 26, p. 92 

144b 

Sec. 54, p. 98 


94b 

Sec. 27, p. 93 

146a 

Sec. 55, p. 98 


96b 

Sec. 28, p. 94 

148a 

Sec. 56, p. 98 


101a 

Sec. 29, p- 94 

150b 

Sec. 57, p. 98 


105b 

Sec. 30, p. 94 

152b 

Sec. 58, p. 98 


107a 

Sec. 31, p. 94 

153a 

Sec. 59, p. 99 


108b 

Sec. 32, p.95 

155a 

Sec. 60, p. 99 


109b 

Sec. 33 . P -95 

156b 

Sec. 61, p. 99 


ma 

Sec. 34, p. 95 

158b 

Sec. 62, p. 99 


112a 

Sec. 35, P- 95 

161b 

Sec. 63, p. 99 


113a 

Sec. 36, p. 95 

163a 

Sec. 64, p. 100 


115a 

Sec. 37, p- 95 

165b 

Sec. 65, p. 100 


117a 

Sec. 38, p. 96 

170b 

Sec. 66, p. 100 


1 20a 

Sec. 39, p. 96 

174b 

Sec. 67, p. 100 


121b 

Sec. 40, p. 96 

179b 

Sec. 68, p. 101 


123b 

Sec. 41, p. 96 

184a 

Sec. 69, p. 101 


124b 

Sec. 42, p. 96 

188b 

Sec. 70, p. 101 


126b 

Sec. 43, p. 96 

191b 

Sec. 71, p. 101 


128a 

Sec. 44, p. 96 

195b- 

■199a Sec. 72, p. 102 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Bibliography 


213 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Printed sources and studies cited in the Introduction and Commentary , to which a few 

related works have been added 

' Abd al-Jabbar (al-Qadi, Abu al-Hasan), al-Mughni , vol. iv (Ru’yat al-Bari), ed. M. M. 
Hilmi and A. al-Gh. al-Taftazani, Cairo, 1965. 

Abu al-Faraj ibn al-'Ibri (Bar Hebraeus), see Ibn al-'Ibri. 

Ackrill, J. L., Aristotle's Categories and De Interpretation, translated with Notes and 
Glossary, Oxford, 1963. 

al-Adfuwi, see al-Udfuwi. 

Afnan, S. M A Philosophical Lexicon in Persian and Arabic , Beirut, 1969. 

al-Akfam, Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Sa'id al-Ansari, Irshad al-qasid ild asnd 
al-maqasid , Cairo, 1900. 

Alfarabi, see al-FarabL 

Alhazen, see Ibn al-Haytham; Risner. 

'All ibn 'Isa (al-Kahhal), Tadhkirat al-kahhaltn, Hyderabad, Dn., 1964. 

Alkindi, see al-Kindl. 

Allan, James W., Persian Metal Technology, 700-1300 A.D., London, 1979. 

'Arafat, W. and Winter, H. J.J., ‘The Light of the Stars: A short Discourse by Ibn 
al-Haytham’, British Journal for the History of Science, 5 (1971), pp. 282-88. 

'Arafat, W., see also Winter. 

Aristotle, Minor Works , trans. W. S. Hett. Loeb Classical Library, Cambridge, Mass, 
and London, 1963. 

Aristotle, Posterior Analytics . [Text and translation] by Hugh Tredennick. Topica. 
[Text and translation] by E. S. Forster. Loeb Classical Library, Cambridge, Mass, 
and London, 1960. 

Aristotle, Problems, vol. 1 (Bks i-xxi), with English translation by W. S. Hett. Loeb 
Classical Library, Cambridge, Mass, and London, 1961. 

Aristotle, see also Ackrill; Badawi; Hamlyn; Petraitis; Ross. pseudo-Aristotle, see 
Ruska. 

'Arshi, Imtiyaz 'All, Catalogue of the Arabic Manuscripts in the Raza Library , Rampur. 
Vol. v: Mathematics, etc. Rampur, U.P., India, 1975. 

Averroes, Epitome ofParva Naturalia. Translated from the original Arabic and Hebrew 
and Latin Versions with Notes and Introduction by Harry Blumberg. Corpus 
Commentariorum Averrois in Aristotelem, vn [English Version], Cambridge, 
Mass., 1961. 

Averrois Cordubensis Colliget Libri VII, Venice, 1562. Repr. in Aristotelis Opera cum 
Averrois Commentariis , Suppl. 1, Frankfurt-am-Main, 1962. 

Averrois Cordubensis Compendia librorum Aristotelis qui Parva naturalia vocantur. [The 
Arabic text of Talkhis Kitab al-Hiss wa al-mahsus ,] ed. Harry Blumberg. Corpus 
Commentariorum Averrois in Aristotelem, vn [Arabic Version]. Cambridge, 
Mass., 1972. 

Averrois in Aristotelis libros Meteorologicorum Expositio media, Venice, 1562. Repr. in 
Aristotelis Opera cum Averrois Commentariis , vol. v, Frankfurt-am-Main, 1962. 


214 


Bibliography 


Bibliography 


215 


Averroes, Quitab el Culiat ( Libro de las Generalidades) . Publicaciones del Instituto 
General Franco por la Investigation Hispano-Arabe. Larache, 1939. [Facsimile of a 
MS dated $afar, 583/1187 of the Arabic text of Kitab al-Kulliyyat.] 

Averroes, see also van den Bergh. 

Avicenna, De anima (Arabic Text), being the psychological part of Kitab al-Shija \ edited 
by F. Rahman, Oxford, i960. [First published in 1959.] 

Avicenna, Liber De anima I-II-III, edition critique de la traduction latine medievale 
par S. Van Riet, Louvain/Leiden, 1972. 

Avicenna, Liber De anima IV-V , edition critique de la traduction latine medievale par 
S. Van Riet, Louvain/Leiden, 1968. 

Avicenna, see also Rahman. 

Baarmann, J., 'Abhandlung iiber das Licht von Ibn Haitam’, Zeitschriji der Deutschen 
Morgenlandischen Gesellschaji , 36 (1882), pp. 195-237. (Reviewed by E. Wiedemann 
in Zeitschriji der Deutschen Morgenlandischen Gesellschaji , 38 [1884], pp. 145-48.) 

Badawl, 'Abdurrahman (ed.), Aristutalts: FTal-Nafs. Al-Ara al-tabViyya, al-mansub ila 
Falutarkhus . Al-Hass wa al-mahsus li-Ibn Rushd. Al-Nabat, al-mansiib ila Aristutalts , 
Cairo, 1954. 

Badawi, 'Abdurrahman (ed.), Aristutalts: Ft al-Sama wa al-Athar al-'ulwiyya, Cairo, 
1961. 

Badawi, 'Abdurrahman (ed.), Mantiq Aristu ( Aristotelis Organon ), 3 vols., Cairo, 
1948-52. 

Badawl, 'Abdurrahman (ed.), Shuruh e ala Aristu mafquda ft al-yunaniyya wa rasail 
ukhrd , Beirut, 1971. 

Baneth, D.H., ‘Joseph Ibn Shim'on, Maimonides’ prominent disciple, and Joseph 
Ibn 'Aqnln\ Otzar Yehude Sefarad , 7 (1964), pp. 11-20. 

al-Battani, al-Ztj al-sdbi = see Nallino. 

Bauer, H., Die Psychologie Alhazens aufGrund von Alhazens Optik dargestellt , Beitrage 
zur Geschichte der Philosophic des Mittelalters, 10, no. 5, Munster in Westfalen, 
1911. 

al-Bayhaqi, Zahlr al-DIn, Tatimmaft] Siwdn al-hikma of Alt b. Zaid al-Baihaku Arabic 
text and Persian version edited by M. Shaff . Fasciculus 1 (Arabic text), Lahore, 
1935. See also Meyerhof. 

Beare, John I., Greek Theories of elementary Cognition from Alcmaeon to Aristotle , 
Oxford, 1906. 

Bergh, Simon van den (trans.), Averroes ’ Tahajut al-Tahafut ( The Incoherence of the 
Incoherence ), 2 vols, London, 1954. (Repr., 1969). 

Bergstrasser, G., Hunain ibn Ishaq iiber die syrischen und arabischen Galen-Ubersetzungen , 
Abhandlungen fur die Kunde des Morgenlandes, xvii, no. 2, Leipzig, 1925. 

al-Blruni, Rasa'il, Hyderabad, Dn., 1948. 

al-Blruni, Kitab alfamdhir ft ma'rifat al-jawahir, Hyderabad, Dn., a.h. 1355. 

al-BIrunl, al-Qanun al-Mas'udl, 3 vols, Hyderabad, Dn., 1954-56. 

al-Blruni, see Kennedy. 


Bjornbo, A. and Vogl, S. (eds.), Alkindi, Tideus und Pseudo-Euklid: Drei optische 
Werke , herausgegeben und erklart von A. B. und S.V., Abhandlungen zur 
Geschichte der mathematischen Wissenschaften, xxvi. 3, Leipzig/Berlin, 1912. 

Block, Irving, ‘Truth and Error in Aristotle’s Theory of Sense Perception’, Philoso- 
phical Quarterly , 11 (1961), pp. 1-9. 

Blumberg, Harry (ed. and trans.), see Averroes. 

Boring, Edwin G., Sensation and Perception in the History of Experimental Pyschology , 
New York, 1942. 

Bowen, H., ‘'All ibn 'Isa (al -Dj arrahV. in EP , 1, pp. 386-88. 

Boyer, Carl B., The Rainbow, from Myth to Mathematics , New York/London, 1959. 

Brockelmann, Carl, GAL = Geschichte der arabischen Litteratur , I 2 (Leiden, 1943), II 2 
(Leiden, 1949), Suppl. 1 (Leiden, 1937), Suppl. 11 (Leiden, 1938), Suppl. in (Leiden, 
1942). 

Cherniss, Harold, ‘Galen and Posidonius’ Theory of Vision’, American Journal of 
Philology , 54 ( 1933 ), PP- 154 -bi. 

Clagett, Marshall, Archimedes in the Middle Ages , vol. 1: The Arabo-Latin Tradition , 
Madison, Wise., 1964. 

Clagett, Marshall, Archimedes in the Middle Ages , vol. v: Quasi- Archimedean Geometry 
in the Thirteenth Century, etc., Philadelphia, 1984. 

Cohen, Morris R. and Drabkin, I. E., A Source Book in Greek Science , Cambridge, 
Mass., 1958. 

Crombie, A. C., ‘The Mechanistic Hypothesis and the scientific Study of Vision: 
Some optical Ideas as a Background to the Invention of the Microscope’, in 
S. Bradbury and G. L’E. Turner (eds), Historical Aspects of Microscopy , Cambridge, 
1967, pp. 3-1 12. 

Daiber, Hans, Aetius Arabus: Die Vorsokratiker in arabischer Uberlieferung, Wiesbaden, 
1980. 

Damianus of Larissa, see Schone. 

Diodes, seeToomer 

Diogenes Laertius, Lives of Eminent Philosophers, with an English translation by R. D. 
Hicks. Loeb Classical Library, 2 vols, Cambridge, Mass, and London, 1959. 

Djebbar, A., Deux mathematiciens peu connus de VEspagne du Xle siecle: al-Mutaman et 
Ibn Sayyid, Universite Paris-Sud, Departement de Mathematique, 1984. 

DSB = Dictionary of Scientific Biography , ed. C. C. Gillispie, 16 vols. New York, 
1970-80. 

Dubler, Cesar E. and Teres, Elias, La 1 Materia Medica’ de Dioscorides, vol. n: La version 
drabe de la 1 Materia Medica * de Dioscorides, Texto, variantes et indices, Tetuan/ 
Barcelona, 1952-57. 

Eastwood, Bruce, ‘Alhazen, Leonardo, and Late-Medieval Speculation on the Inver- 
sion of Images in the Eye’, Annals of Science , 43 (1986), pp. 413-46. 

EP = Encyclopaedia of Islam, new edition, Leiden, i960-. 


216 


Bibliography 


Ettinghausen, Richard, ‘Al-Ghazzail on Beauty’, in K. Bharatha Iyer (ed.). Art and 
Thought, issued in Honour of Dr Ananda K. Coomaraswamy on the Occasion of his 
70th Birthday , London, 1947, pp. 160-65. [This utilizes German and English 
translations of al-Ghazali’ s Klmiya-i Sa e ddat (‘The Alchemy of Happiness’), a 
Persian abridgement of the Ihya see al-Ghazali. ] 

Euclide: L'Optique et la Catoptrique , trans. Paul Ver Eecke, nouveau tirage, Paris, 1959. 
(Includes Theon’s Recension.) 

Euclidis Optica , Opticorum recensio Theonis , Catoptrica, cum scholiis antiquis , ed.J.L. 
Heiberg = Euclidis Opera omnia , ed. J. L. Heiberg and M. Menge, vol. vn, Leipzig, 

1895- 

al-Farabi, Rasa’il, Hyderabad, Dn., 1926. 

al-Farabl, Catalogo des las ciencias . Edition y traduction castellana por Angel Gonzalez 
Palencia, Madrid, 1932. 

al-Farabl, Falsafat Aristutalis, ed. Muhsin MahdT, Beirut, 1961. 

al-Farabi, Ihsa al-'ulum, ed. 'Uthman Amin, 2nd ed., Cairo, 1949 [1st ed., Cairo, 
I93i]- 

al-Farabl, Kitab al-Aljaz al-musta'mala fi al-mantiq, ed. Muhsin Mahdi, Beirut, 1986. 

al-Farabl, see also Abu Rida; Walzer. 

Frank, Richard M., ‘Al-Ma'na: Some Reflections on the technical Meaning of the 
Term in the kaldm and its Use in the Physics of Mu'ammar’, Journal of the American 
Oriental Society , 87 (1967), pp. 248-59. 

Frank, Richard M., ‘Meanings are spoken of in many Ways: the earlier Arab 
Grammarians’, Museon , 94 (1981), pp. 259-319. 

Gatje, Helmut, ‘Die arabische Ubersetzung der Schrift des Alexander von Aphro- 
disias iiber die Farbe’, Nachrichten der Akademie der Wissenschafen in Gottingen , 
Philologisch-historische Klasse, 1967, no. 10, pp. 342-82. (Includes Arabic text, 
German translation and Arabic-Greek glossaries.) 

Gatje, Helmut, ‘Die “inneren sinne” bei Averroes’, Zeitschrift der Deutschen 
Morgenldndischen Gesellschaft, 115 (1965), pp. 255-93. 

Gatje, Helmut, Studien zur Uberlieferung der aristotelischen Psychologie im Islam , Heidel- 
berg, 1971. 

Gatje, Helmut, ‘Zur Farbenlehre in der muslimischen Philosophic’, Der Islam , 43 
(1967), pp. 280-301. 

Galen, Opera omnia , ed. C. G. Kuhn, 20 vols, Leipzig, 1821-33. (Repr., Hildesheim, 
1964-65.) 

Galen, On the Usefulness of the Parts of the Body , Translated from the Greek with an 
Introduction and Commentary by Margaret Tallmadge May. 2 vols with con- 
tinuous pagination, Ithaca, N.Y., 1968. 

Galen, Sieben Bucher der Anatomie des Galen. Anatomikon enkcheireseon biblion 

zum ersten Male veroffentlicht nach den Handschriften einer arabischen Uber- 
setzung des 9. Jh. n. Chr., ins Deutsche iibertragen und kommentiert von Max 
Simon, 2 vols, Leipzig, 1906. 


Bibliography 


217 


Gauthier, Leon, Antecedents greco-arabes de la psycho-physique, Beirut, 1939. 

al-Ghazali, Ihya * u/um al-din , published by Mu’assasat al-Halabi, vol. iv, Cairo, 1968. 

al-Ghazali, aUMunqidh min al-daldl, ed. M. *Abd al-Hamid, 2nded., Cairo, 1955. 

Goldstein, Bernard, ‘Ibn Mu'adh’s Treatise on Twilight and the Height of the 
Atmosphere’, Archive for History of Exact Sciences , 17 (1977), pp. 97-118. 

Goldstein, Bernard, see Ptolemy. 

Gombrich, E. H., Art and Illusion: A Study in the Psychology of pictorial Representation , 
London/New York, i960. 

Gudemann, M., Das jiidische Unterrichtswesen wahrend der spanisch-arabischen Periode , 
Vienna, 1873 (Repr., Amsterdam, 1968). 

Guerlac, Henry, ‘Can there be colors in the dark? Physical color theory before 
Newton’, Journal of the History of Ideas, 47 (1986), pp. 3-20. 

Guthrie, W. K. C., A History of Greek Philosophy , 6 vols, Cambridge, 1971-81. 

Haas, Arthur Erich, ‘Antike Lichttheorien’, Archiv fur Geschichte der Philosophic , 20 
(1907), pp. 345-86. 

Hahm, David E., ‘Early Hellenistic Theories of Vision and the Perception of Color’, 
in Machamer and Turnbull (eds.). Studies in Perception , pp. 60-95. 

Hamlyn, D. W., Aristotle's De Anima , Books II and III , Translation with Introduction 
and Notes, Oxford, 1968. 

Hamlyn, D. W., Sensation and Perception: A History of the Philosophy of Perception , 
London, 1969. (First published in 1961.) 

Haqqi, Isma'Il (al-Izmlri), Faylasuf al-* Arab Ya e qub ibn Ishaq al- Kindi, translated from 
Turkish by 'Abbas al-'AzzawI, Baghdad, 1963. 

Hartner, Willy, ‘al-Battanl’, in DSB , 1, pp. 507-16. 

Haskins, Charles Homer, Studies in the History of Mediaeval Science , New York, i960. 
[First published in 1924.] 

Heath, Sir Thomas, Mathematics in Aristotle , Oxford, 1949. 

Heiberg, J. L. (ed.), Mathematici Graeci Minores, Kgl. Danske Videnskabemes Selskab. 
Historisk-filologiske Meddelelser, xm, 3, Copenhagen, 1927. 

Heiberg, J. L. and Wiedemann, E., ‘Ibn al Haitams Schrift tiber parabolische 
Hohlspiegel’, Bibliotheca Mathematica , 3rd series, 10 (1909-10), pp. 201-37. 

Heinen, Anton, ‘Ibn al- Haitams Autobiographie in einer Handschrift aus dem Jahre 
556H./1161 A.D.’, in U. Haarmann and P. Bachmann (eds), Die islamische Welt 
zwischen Mittelalter und Neuzeit: Festschrifi fur Robert Roemer zum 6y Geburtstag , 
Beiruter Texte und Studien, Band xxn, Beirut, 1979* PP- 254-77. 

Heinen, Anton, ‘On some hitherto unknown Manuscripts of Works by Ibn al- 
Haytham’, forthcoming in Proceedings of the Second International Symposium on the 
History of Arabic Science , held in Aleppo, 1979. 

Helmholtz, H. von. Treatise on Physiological Optics , ed. James P. C. Southall, 3 vols.. 
New York, N.Y., 1962. (A translation of the 3rd, posthumous edition of Handbuch 
der physiologischen Optik , Hamburg and Leipzig, 1909-1 1.) 


218 


Bibliography 


Herons von Alexandria Mechanik und Katoptrik , herausgegeben und iibersetzt von L. 
Nix and W. Schmidt = Heronis Alexandrini Opera quae supersunt omnia , vol. II, 
fasc. I, Leipzig, 1900. 

Hirschberg, Julius, Geschichte der Augenheilkunde bei den Arabern = Graefe-Saemisch, 
Handbuch der gesamten Augenheilkunde , 2nd ed., vol. xm, Bk 2, Leipzig, 1908. 

Hirschberg, Julius, Lippert, J. and Mittwoch, E., Die arabischen Augendrzte , pt 2, 
Leipzig, 1905. 

Hirschberg, Julius, Lippert, J. and Mittwoch, E., Die arabischen Lehrbucher der 
Augenheilkunde , Abhandlungen der Koniglich Preussischen Akademie der Wissen- 
schaften, Philosophisch-historische KL, Berlin, 1905, Anhang 1, pp. 89-91. 

Hogendijk, J. P., Ibn al-Haytham’s Completion of the Conics , New York/Berlin/ 
Heidelberg/Tokyo, 1985. 

Hogendijk, J. P., ‘Discovery of an 11th-century geometrical Compilation: the 
Istikmal of Yusuf al-Mu’taman ibn Hud, King of Saragossa’, Historia Mathematica , 
13 (1986), pp. 43-52. 

Hunayn ibn Ishaq, The Book of the Ten Treatises on the Eye ascribed to Hunain ibn Is-Haq 
(809—877 A.D.). The Arabic Text, edited with English Translation and Glossary by 
Max Meyerhof, Cairo, 1928. 

Hunayn ibn Ishaq, see Bergstrasser. 

Huxley, G. L., Anthemius of Tralles: A Study in Later Greek Geometry , Cambridge, 
Mass., 1959. 

Ibn Abl Usaybi'a, 'Uyun al-anba* JT Tabaqat al-atibba\ ed. August Muller, 2 vols, 
Cairo-Konigsberg, 1882-84. 

Ibn Faris, Abu al-FIasan Ahmad, Mu jam maaayis al-lugha , ed. 'Abd al-Salam Harun, 
6 vols., Cairo, a.h. 1366-71. 

Ibn al-Haytham, Rasa’il = Majmu al-rasa’il, Hyderabad, Dn., a.h. 1357 [a.d. 1938- 
39]. This is made up of eight short works by I. H. to which a ninth (Risalafi Khawass 
al-muthallath minjihat al-'amud) was added in A.H. 1366/A. D. 1974. All nine works 
are separately paginated. 

Ibn al-Haytham, Maqala ft Adwa 1 al-kawakib (‘On the Light of the Stars’). No. 1 in 
Rasa’il. 

Ibn al-Haytham, Maqala ft 'Amal al-musabba' ft al-dd’ira (‘On Constructing a Hepta- 
gon in a Circle’). Edition and French translation in R. Rashed, ‘Ibn al-Haytham wa 
'amal al-musabba'’, Journal for the History of Arabic Science , 3 (1979), pp. 218-47 
(Arabic), 310-57 (French). 

Ibn al-Haytham, Maqala (or Qawl) ft al-Daw' (‘Discourse on Light*). No. 9 in Rasail. 
A recension by Kamal al-DIn is in Tanqih , 11, pp. 401-07. See also Baarmann; MursI; 
Rashed; Wiedemann. 

Ibn al-Haytham, Maqala fi Qaw * al-qamar (‘On the Light of the Moon’). No. 8 in 
Rasa’il. See Kohl. 

Ibn al-Haytham, Dubitationes in Ptolemaeum. See al-Shukuk e ala Batlamyus. 

Ibn al-Haytham, Qawl (or Maqala) fi Hall shukukharakat al-iltifaf Edition by A. I. Sabra 
in Journal for the History of Arabic Science , 3 (1979), pp. 183-217 (Arabic section). 


L 


Bibliography 


219 


Ibn al-Haytham, Maqala fi Maiyyat al-athar alladhv ft wajh al-qamar (‘On the Nature of 
the Mark [seen] on the Face of the Moon’). Edition by A. I. Sabra in Journal for the 
History of Arabic Science, 1 (1977), pp. 5-19 (Arabic section). See Schoy. 

Ibn al-Haytham, al-Mandzir I-II-III = Kitdb al-Mandzir . Books I-II-III: On Direct 
Vision. Edited, with Introduction, Arabic-Latin Glossaries and Concordance 
Tables, by A. I. Sabra, Kuwait, 1983. See also Risner. 

Ibn al-Haytham, Maqala fi al-Mardya al-muhriqa bi-al-dawa’ir (‘On Spherical Burning 
Mirrors’). No. 4 in Rasa'il. See also Wiedemann; Winter and 'Arafat. 

Ibn al-Haytham, Maqala fi al-Mardyd al-muhriqa bi-al-qutu (‘On Parabolic Burning 
Mirrors’). No. 3 in Rasa'il. See also Heiberg and Wiedemann; Winter and 'Arafat. 

Ibn al-Haytham, Fasl fi Muqaddamat di/' al-musabba\ Edition in R. Rashed, ‘Ibn 
al-Haytham wa 'amal al-musabba'*, Journal for the History of Arabic Science , 3 (1979), 
pp. 218-47 (Arabic), 310-57 (French). 

Ibn al-Haytham, Maqala ft Shark musadarat Kitdb Uqltdis. Edition and English 
translation in B. A. Sude, Ibn al-Haytham ’s Commentary on the Premises of Euclid's 
Elements, Bks. I-VII. Doctoral dissertation, Princeton University, 1974. (Univer- 
sity Microfilms International, no. DCJ 75-23243.) 

Ibn al-Haytham, al-Shukuk e ala Batlamyus (Dubitationes in Ptolemaeum), ed. A. I. Sabra 
andN. Shehaby, Cairo, 1971. 

Ibn al-Haytham, Maqala fi Tamdm Kitdb al-makhrutdt . MS Manisa, Genel 1706 
published in facsimile, and with an introduction, by N. Terzioglu as Das achte Buck 
zu den 1 Conica ' des Apollonios von Perge, rekonstruiert von Ibn al-Haysam , The 
Mathematical Research Institute, Istanbul, 1974. See a Iso Hogendijk. 

Ibn al-Haytham, see Risner. 

Ibn al-'Ibri, Abu al-Faraj, Ta’rikh mukhtasar al-duwal, ed. An^un $alhani, S. J., Beirut, 
1958. 

Ibn Khaldun, The Muqaddimah, translated from the Arabic by Franz Rosenthal, 3 vols, 
Princeton, N.J., 1967. 

Ibn Manzur, Lisan al-'Arab, 20 vols, Cairo, completed in a.h. 1308. 

Ibn al-Nadlm, al-Fihrist, ed. Gustav Flugel, 2 vols, Leipzig, 1871-72. 

Ibn al-Qifp, Ta'rikh al-hukama \ ed. Julius Lippert, Leipzig, 1903. (See corrections to this 
edition by H. Suter in Bibliotheca Mathematica, 3rd series, 4[i903]> esp. pp. 295-96.) 

Ibn Rushd, Abu al-Walld Muhammad ibn Ahmad . . . al-hafid (‘the Grandson’), see 
Averroes. 

Ibn Rushd, Muhammad ibn Ahmad (‘the Grandfather’), Kitab al-Muqaddamat al- 
mumahhidat . . ., 2 vols, Cairo, a.h. 1325. 

Ibn SIna, see Avicenna. 

Ibn Sinan, Ibrahim, Rasa’il Ibn Sindn , ed. A. S. Saidan, Kuwait, 1983. 

Ikhwan al-$afa\ Rasa’il, 4 vols, Beirut, 1957. 

al-Jahi?, 'Amr ibn Bahr, ‘Risalat al-Qiyan’, in Rasa’il al-Jdhi% , ed. 'A. M. Harun, 
vol. 11, Cairo, 1965, no. 14, pp. 1 39-82. 

al-Jazan, Abu al-'Izz ibn al-Razzaz, al-Jami e bayn al- e ilm wa al-'amal al-ndfi' ft $\na'at 
al-hiyal , ed. Ahmad Y. Al-Hassan, Aleppo, 1979- 

Jolivet, Jean, U intellect selon Kindi, Leiden, 1971. 



220 


Bibliography 


Kahle, Paul, ‘The Arabic Shadow Play in Egypt’, Journal of the Royal Astatic Society of 
Great Britain and Ireland , Part I: January, 1940, pp. 21-34. (A recent bibliography is 
inj. M. Landau, Shadow-Plays in the Near East, Jerusalem, 1948.] 

Kamal al-Din al-Farisi, Tanqih = Tanqih al-Manazir li-dhawi al-absar wa al-basair , 
2 vols, Hyderabad, Dn., a.h. i 347-48/A. d. 1928-30. 

Kennedy, E. S., The exhaustive Treatise on Shadows by Abu al-Rayhdn . . . al-Blruni. 
Translation and Commentary, 2 vols, Aleppo, 1976. 

Kepler, Johannes, Ad Vitellionem paralipomena , Frankfurt, 1604. Re-edited in 
Gesammelte Werke , 11, ed. F. Hammer, Munich, 1939. 

Kepler, Johannes, Paralipomenes a Vitellion (1604), traduction, introduction et notes 
par Catherine Chevalley, Paris, 1980 

al-Khayyami, 'Umar, Risala ft Sharh ma ashkala min musddarat Kitab Uqlidis, ed. A. I. 
Sabra, Alexandria, 1961. 

al-Khayyami, 'Umar, see Woepcke. 

al-Khwarizml, Abu 'Abd Allah Muhammad ibn Ahmad, Mafdtih al- e ulum, ed. G. van 
Vloten, Leiden, 1895. 

al-Kindl, Rasa'il al-Kindi al-falsafyya, ed. M. *A. Abu Rida, 2 vols, Cairo, 1950-53. 

al-Kindi, De aspectibus. See Bjdrnbo and Vogl. 

al-Kindi, Matarih al-shu f a e (‘Propagation of Rays’). MS published in facsimile by 
M. Y. Haschmi, Aleppo, 1967. 

al-Kindi, Kitab ft ma'rifat quwd al-adwiya al-murakkaba , see Gauthier. 

al-Kindi, seejolivet. 

King, David A., ‘A Handlist of the Arabic and Persian astronomical Manuscripts in 
the Maharaja Mansingh 11 Library in Jaipur \ Journal for the History of Arabic Science , 
4 (1980), pp. 81-86. 

Kirk, G. S., Raven, J. E. and Schofield, M., The Presocratic Philosophers: A critical 
History with a Selection of Texts, 2nded., Cambridge, 1983. 

Kohl, Karl, ‘Uber das Licht des Mondes, eine Untersuchung von Ibn al-Haitham’, 
Sitzungsberichte der Physikalisch-medizinischen Sozietdt in Erlangen, 56-57 (1924-25), 
pp. 305-98. 

Kraemer, Joel L., Humanism in the Renaissance of Islam: The Cultural Revival during the 
BuyidAge, Leiden, 1986. 

Kraus, Paul, Jdbir ibn Hayydn: Contribution a Vhistoire des idees scientifiques dans ITslam , 
vol. 11: Jdbir et la science grecque, Cairo, 1942 (Memoires presentes a l’lnstitut 
d’Egypie, 45). 

Krause, Max, ‘Stambuler Handschriften islamischer Mathematiker’, Quellen und 
Studien zur Geschichte der Mathematik, Astronomie und Physik , Abt. B: Studien, 
Band m, Heft 4 (9 November, 1936), pp. 437-532. 

Lane, E. W., An Arabic-English Lexicon , 8 vols., London 1863-93. 

Lejeune, Albert, Euclide et Ptolemee, deux stades de Pop tique geometrique grecque, Louvain, 
1948. 

Lejeune, Albert, ‘Les recherches de Ptolemee sur la vision binoculaire’, Janus , 47 
(1958), pp. 79-86. 


Bibliography 


221 


Lejeune, Albert, Recherches sur la catoptrique grecque , d’apres les sources antiques et 
medievales, Brussels, 1957. 

Lejeune, Albert, see also Ptolemy. 

Leonardo da Vinci, The Literary Works, compiled and edited from the original 
Manuscripts by Jean Paul Richter, 2 vols, 3rd ed., London, 1970. 

Liddell, H. G. etal.,see LSJ. 

Lindberg, David C., A Catalogue of Medieval and Renaissance Optical Manuscripts , 
Toronto, 1975. 

Lindberg, David C., ‘Alhazen’s Theory of Vision and its Reception in the West’, Isis , 
58(1967), pp. 321-41. 

Lindberg, David C., ‘Alkindi’s critique of Euclid’s Theory of Vision’, Isis , 62 (1971), 
pp. 469-89. 

Lindberg, David C., introduction’ to the 1972 reprint o fOpticae thesaurus. See Risner. 

Lindberg, David C., Theories of Vision from Al-Kindi to Kepler, Chicago, 1976. 

Lohne, J., ‘Regenbogen und Brechzahl’, Sudhojfs Archiv , 49 (1964), pp. 401-15. 

Long, A. A., Hellenistic Philosophy: Stoics, Epicureans, Sceptics, London, 1974. 

LSJ = Liddell, H. G., Scott, R. and Jones, H. S., A Greek-English Lexicon , New 
Edition, Oxford, 1953. (Reprint of the 9th edition, 1940.) 

Machamer, Peter K. and Turnbull, Robert G. (eds.). Studies in Perception: Interrelations 
in the History of Philosophy and Science , Columbus, Ohio, 1978. 

Mahdi, Muhsin (ed.), see al-Farabi. 

al-Maqqari, Nafh al-tib min ghusn al-andalus al-ratib , ed. R. Dozy, G. Dugat, L. Krehl 
and W. Wright, 2 vols, Leiden 1855-61. 

Maulavi, Abdul Hamid, Catalogue of the Arabic and Persian Manuscripts in the Oriental 
Public Library at Bankipore, vol. xxn (Arabic MSS, Sciences), Bihar, Patna, 1937. 

McVaugh, Michael R. (ed.), Amaldi de Villanova Opera medica omnia . 11: Aphorismi de 
gradibus, Granada/Barcelona, 1975. 

Meyerhof, Max, ‘ e AH al-Bayhaqi’s Tatimmat $iwdn al-hikma. A biographical Work on 
learned Men of the Islam’, Osiris, 8 (1948), pp. 122-216. 

Meyerhof, Max, ‘Die Optik der Araber’, Zeitschrijt fur ophthalmologische Optik , 8 
(1920), pp. 16-29, 42-54, 86-90. 

Meyerhof, Max, Sarh asma* al-'uqqar (L* explication des noms de drogues): Unglossaire de 
matiere medicale compose par Ma'imonide (Memoires presentes a linstitut d’Egypte, 
41), Cairo, 1940. 

Meyerhof, Max, see Hunayn ibn Ishaq. 

Misch, G., Geschichte der Autobiographic, Bkm, pt 2, Frankfurt-am-Main, 1962. 

Munk, S., ‘Notice sur Joseph ben Iehouda ou AbouPhadjadj Yousouf ben- Ya’hya 
al-Sabti al-Maghrebi, disciple de Maimonide’, Journal Asiatique, 3rd series, 14 
(1842), pp. 5-70. 

Mursi, 'A. FL, Risdlat al-liasan ibn al-Haytham ft al-Qaw\ Cairo, 1938. (Includes an 
edition of Maqala ft al-Daw ’) . 

Nallino, Carlo . Alfonso, Al-Battam sive Albatenii Opus astronomicum , Milan, 3 vols, 
1899-1903. 


222 Bibliography 

Nallino, Carlo Alfonso, 'Ilm al-falak, tarxkhuhu 'indal-* Arab ft al-qurun al-wustd, Rome, 

1 9 1 1 * 

Nallino, Carlo Alfonso, Raccolta di scritti editi e inediti , v ( Astrologia-Astronomia - 
Geografia ), Rome, 1944. 

Narducci, Enrico, ‘Intorno ad una traduzione italiana, fatta nel secolo decimoquarto, 
del trattato d'Ottica d’Alhazen, matematico del secolo undecimo, e ad altri lavori di 
questo scienziato’, Bullettino di Bibliografia e di storia delle scienze matematiche e fisiche , 
4(1871), pp. 1-48. 

Narducci, Enrico, ‘Giunte alio scritto intitolato “Intorno ad una traduzione italiana, 
fatta nel secolo decimoquarto, del trattato d'Ottica di Alhazen”’, Bullettino di 
Bibliografia e di storia delle scienze matematiche e fisiche , 4 (1871), pp. 137-93. 

Na$Ir al-Din al-Tusi, see al-Tusi. 

Nazif, Mustafa, 4 Ara al-faldsifa al-islamiyym ft al-haraka ’ (‘Views of the Islamic 
Philosophers on Motion’), Risdlat al-'llm , 25:4 (October-December, 1958), 
pp. 45 - 64 . 

Nazif, Mu§tafa, al-Hasan = al-Hasan ibn al-Haytham, buhuthuhu wa kushiijuhu al- 
basariyya , 2 vols (with continuous pagination), Cairo, 1942-43. (First vol. reviewed 
by George Sarton in Isis , 34 (1942-43], pp. 217-18.) 

Nazif, Mustafa, ‘Kamal al-Din al-Farisi wa ba'd buhuthuhu fi 'ilm al-daw’ [K. al-D. 
and some of his researches in optics]’, Publications of the Egyptian Society for the 
History of Science , no. 2 (Memorial Lectures on Ibn al-Haytham), Cairo, 1958, 
pp. 65-100. 

Nebbia, G., ‘Ibn al-Haytham nel millesimo anniversario della nascita’, Physis , 9 
(1967), pp. 165-214. 

Oates, Whitney J., The Stoic and Epicurean Philosophers. The complete extant Writings of 
Epicurus, Epictetus, Lucretius, Marcus Aurelius, New York, 1940. 

OED = Oxford English Dictionary. 

Olympiodori in Aristotelis Meteor a Commentaria , ed. Guilelmus Stuve. Commentaria in 
Aristotelem Graeca, vol. xn, pars 11, Berlin, 1900. 

Olympiodorus, Tafsir AlimfTdurus li-Kitab Aristiitdlis fi al-Athar al- e ulwiyya [‘Com- 
mentary on Aristotle’s Meteorology’, translated by Hunayn ibn Ishaq and revised 
by Ishaq ibn Hunayn], in Badawl (ed.), Shuruh f ald Aristu . . . (q. v.), pp. 83-190. 

Panofsky, Erwin, ‘The History of the Theory of Human Proportions as a Reflection 
of the History of Styles’, in Meaning in the Visual Arts: Papers in and on Art History , 
Garden City, N.Y., 1955, pp. 55-107 

Peters, F. E., Aristoteles Arabus. The Oriental Translations and Commentaries on the 
Aristotelian Corpus, Leiden, 1968. 

Petraitis, Casimir (ed.), The Arabic Version of Aristotle's Meteorology, a critical edition 
with an Introduction and Greek-Arabic Glossaries, Beirut, 1967. 

Petri Nonii Salaciensis De crepusculis liber unus, nunc recens et natus et editus. Item Allacen 
Arabis uetustissmi, de causis Crepusculorum Liber unus, a Gerardo Cremonensi iam olim 
Latinitate donatus, nunc uero omnium primum in lucem editus , Lisbon, 1542. 


Bibliography 223 

Pines, Schlomo, Studies in Arabic Versions of Greek Texts and in Mediaeval Science, 
Collected Works of S. P., Part II, Jerusalem and Leiden, 1986. 

Pines, Schlomo, ‘RazI critique de Galien’, Actes du septieme Congres international 
d'histoire des sciences, Jerusalem, August 1953, PP- 480-87. 

Plotinus, Enneads, with an English translation by A. H. Armstrong, Loeb Classical 
Library, Cambridge, Mass, and London, 7 vols., 1966-88. 

Plutarch, ‘The Face of the Moon’, in Moralia, vol. xn (920A-999B), with English 
translation by Harold Cherniss and William C. Helmbold, Loeb Classical Library, 
Cambridge, Mass, and London, 1968, pp. 2-223. 

Procli Diadochi in primum Euclidis Elementorum librum commentarii, ed. G. Friedlein, 
Leipzig, 1873. (Repr. Hildesheim, 1967.) 

Proclus, A Commentary on the first Book of Euclid's Elements, translated with Introduc- 
tion and Notes by Glenn R. Morrow, Princeton, N.J., 1970. 

Ptol.femaei] Opt.[ica] = L'Optique de Claude Ptolemee dans la version latine d'apres Varabe 
de I'emir Eugene de Sidle, edition critique et exegetique par Albert Lejeune, Louvain, 
1956. 

Ptolemy, Syntaxis Mathematica = Claudi Ptolemaei Opera quae extant omnia, ed.J. L. 
Heiberg, vol. 1, 2 parts, Leipzig, 1898-1903. 

Ptolemy, Almagest, translated and annotated by G. J. Toomer, London, 1984. 

Ptolemy, The Arabic Version of Ptolemy's Planetary Hypotheses , ed. Bernard R. 
Goldstein, Transactions of the American Philosophical Society, N. S. vol. 57, pt4, 
Philadelphia, 1967. 

al-Qalqashandi, Abu al-'Abbas Ahmad, Subh al-a'sha, vol. in, Cairo, 1938. 

Rahman, F., Avicenna's Psychology. An English Translation ofKitdb al-Najat, Book II, 
Chapter vi with historico-philosophical Notes and textual Improvements on the Cairo 
Edition, Oxford, 1952. (Repr., Westport, Connecticut 1981.) 

Rashed, R., ‘Le “Discours de la lumiere” d’Ibn al-Haytham’, Revue d'histoire des 
sciences, 21 (1968), pp. 198-224. 

Rashed, R., ‘Kamal al-Din al-Farisi’, in DSB, vn (1973), pp. 212-19. 

Rashed, R., ‘Le modele de la sphere transparente et l’explication de l’arc-en-ciel: Ibn 
al-Haytham, al-Farisi’, Revue d'histoire des sciences, 23 (1970), pp. 110-40. 

Rashed, R., see also Ibn al-Haytham. 

Risner, Friedrich (ed.), Opticae thesaurus. Alhazeni Arabis libriseptem, nunc primum editi. 
Eiusdem liber De crepusculis et nubium ascensionibus. Item Vitellonis Thuringopoloni libri 
X. Omni instaurati , figuris illustrati et aucti, adiectis etiam in Alhazenum commentariis , a 
Federico Risnero, Basel, 1572. (Reprinted [New York, 1972] with an Introduction by 
David C. Lindberg.) 

Rome, A. (ed.), Commentaires de Pappus etde Theond'Alexandriesurl'Almageste. Tomen, 
Commentairesurleslivres 1 et2del'Almageste, StudieTesti72, Cittadel Vaticano, 1936. 

Rome, A., ‘Notes sur les passages des Catoptriques d’Archimede conserves par Theon 
d’Alexandrie’, Annales de la Societe Scientifique de Bruxelles, serie A, 52 (1932), 

pp. 30-41. 



224 


Bibliography 


Bibliography 


Ronchi, Vasco, Storia della luce, 2nded., Bologna, 1952. 

Ronchi, Vasco, Histoire de la lumiere , translated from the Italian by Juliette Taton, 
Paris, 1956. 

Ronchi, Vasco, The Nature of Light. An historical Survey , translated by V. Barocas, 
London, 1970. 

Rosenthal, Franz, ‘Abu Haiyanal-Tawhidlon Penmanship’, Ars Islamica, 13-14(1948), 
pp. 1-27. [Reprinted without al-Tawhidl’s Arabic text, in idem, Four Essays . . . .] 

Rosenthal, Franz, ‘Die arabische Autobiographic’, in Studia Arabic I = Analecta 
Orientalia , 14 (Rome, 1937), pp. 3-40. 

Rosenthal, Franz, Four Essays on Art and Literature in Islam, Leiden, 1971. 

Rosenthal, Franz, ‘al-Kindi and Ptolemy’, Studi orientalistici in onore di Giorgio Levi 
della Vida, Rome, 1956, 11, pp. 436-56. 

Ross, W. D. (ed.), The Works of Aristotle translated into English, 12 vols, Oxford, 
1910-52. 

Ross, W. D., Aristotle , London and New York, 1964. [First published in 1923.] 

Ross, W. D. (ed.), Aristotle's Prior and Posterior Analytics: A Revised Text with 
Introduction and Commentary, Oxford, 1965. (isted., 1949.) 

Rozenfeld, B., ‘A medieval physico-mathematical Manuscript newly discovered in 
the Kuibyshev Regional Library’, Historia Mathematica, 2 (1975), pp. 67-69. 

Rozenfeld, B., ‘The List of physico-mathematical Works oflbn al-Haytham written 
by himself’, Historia Mathematica, 3 (1976), pp. 75-76. 

Ruska, Julius (ed. and trans.), Das Steinbuch des Aristoteles, Heidelberg, 1912. 

Sabra, A. I., ‘A Note on Codex Biblioteca Medicea Laurenziana, or. 152 \ Journal for 
the History of Arabic Science, 1 (1977), pp. 276-83. 

Sabra, A. I., Article on ‘Ibn al-Haytham’ in DSB, vi (1972), pp. 189-210. 

Sabra, A. I., ‘“Form” in Ibn al-Haytham’s Theory of Vision’, forthcoming in 
Zeitschriji jiir Geschichte der Arabischen-Islamischen Wissenschaften, 5. 

Sabra, A. I., ‘Ibn al-Haytham’s Criticisms of Ptolemy’s Optics', Journal of the History of 
Philosophy, 4 (1966), pp. 145-49. 

Sabra, A. I., ‘Ibn al-Haytham’s Lemmas for solving “Alhazen’s problem” *, Archive 
for History of Exact Sciences, 26 (1982), pp. 299-324. 

Sabra, A. I., ‘Psychology versus Mathematics: Ptolemy and Alhazen on the Moon 
Illusion’, in Edward Grant and John E. Murdoch (eds). Mathematics and its Applica- 
tions to Natural Philosophy in the Middle Ages, Cambridge, 1987, pp. 217—47. 

Sabra, A. I., ‘Sensation and Inference in Alhazen’s Theory of visual Perception’, in 
Machamer and Turnbull (eds). Studies in Perception, pp. 160—85. 

Sabra, A. I., ‘Simplicius’s Proof of Euclid’s Parallels-Postulate’, yowrmi/ of the Warburg 
and Courtauld Institutes, 32 (1969), pp. 1-24. 

Sabra, A. I., ‘The astronomical Origin oflbn al-Haytham’s Concept of Experiment’, 
Actesdu Congres International d’Histoire des Sciences, Paris, 1968, T. mA (Paris, 1971), 
PP- 133-36. 

Sabra, A. I., ‘The Authorship of the Liber de crepusculis , an eleventh-century Work on 
atmospheric Refraction’, Isis, 58 (1967), pp. 77-85 and 560. See also Goldstein. 


225 

Sabra, A. I., Theories of Light from Descartes to Newton, London, 1967. 2nded., 
Cambridge, 1981. 

Sabra, A. I., see Ibn al-Haytham; al-Khayyaml. 

Sacy, Silvestre de, Relation de I’Egypte par Abd al-Latif Paris, 1810. 

al-Safadi, $alah al-Din, al-Ghayth al-musjamfi Sharh Ldmiyyat al-'Ajam, 2 parts, Cairo, 

A.H. I35O. 

al-$afadl, $alahal-DIn, al-Wafi bi-al-Wafayat, xi, ed. ShukriFaysal, Wiesbaden, 1981. 

$a e id al-Andalusi, Tabaqat al-umam, ed. L. Cheikho, S.J., Beirut, 1912. 

Sarton, George, Introduction to the History of Science, 3 vols, Baltimore, 1962. (First 
published in 1927-48.) 

Schoy, Carl, Abhandlung des Schaichs Abu 'All al-Hasan ibn al-Hasan ibn al-Haitham iiber 
die Natur der Spuren [Flecken], die man aufder Oberflache des Mondes sieht, Hannover, 

1925. 

Schone, Richard (ed. and trans.), Damianos: Schrijt iiber Optik , mit Ausziigen aus 
Geminos griechisch und deutsch, Berlin, 1897. 

Schramm, Matthias, ‘Ibn al-Haythams Stellung in der Geschichte der Wissen- 
schaften’, Fikrun wa Fann, 6 (1956), pp. 2-22. 

Schramm, Matthias, Weg — Ibn al-Haythams Weg zur Physik, Wiesbaden, 1963. 

Schramm, Matthias, ‘Steps towards the Idea of Function: A Companson between 
Eastern and Western Science of the Middle Ages’, History of Science, 4 (1965) 
pp. 70-103. 

Schramm, Matthias, ‘Zur Entwicklung der physiologischen Optik in der arabischen 
Literatur’, Sudhojfs Archiv fur Geschichte der Medizin und der Naturwissenschaften, 43 
(1959), pp. 289-316. 

Sezgin, Fuat, GAS = Geschichte des arabischen Schrijitums , esp. vols ill (Medizin- 
Pharmazie-Zoolo gie-T ierheilkunde) , iv ( Alchimie-Chemie-Botanik-Agrikultur) , 
v (Mathematik), vi (Astronomie), vn (Astrologie-Meteorologie und Verwandtes), 
Leiden, 1970-79. 

Siegel, Rudolph E., Galen on Sense Perception, Basel/New York, 1970. 

Simon, Max, see Galen. 

Sincere Brethren, see Ikhwan al-Safa*. 

Smith, A. Mark, ‘Getting the big Picture in perspectivist Optics’, Isis, 72 (1981), 
pp. 568—89. 

Steingass, F., A Comprehensive Persian Dictionary, Beirut, reprint of the ‘New 
Impression’, 1970. (First published, London, 1892.) 

Steinschneider, Mortiz, Die hebrdischen Ubersetzungen des Mittelalters und die Juden als 
Dolmetscher , Berlin, 1893. (Repr., Graz, 1956.) 

Steinschneider, Moritz, ‘Schriften der Araber in hebraischen Hands chriften’, Zeit- 
schriji der Deutschen Morgenldndischen Gesellschajt, 47 (1893), pp. 335-84. 

Stratton, George Malcolm, Theophrastus and the Greek physiological Psychology before 
Aristotle, London/New York, 1917. 

Sude, B. A. (ed.), see Ibn al-Haytham. 

Suter, Heinrich, Die Mathematiker und Astronomen der Araber und ihre Werke, Abhand- 
lungen zur Geschichte der mathematischen Wissenschaften, x, 1900. 


226 


Bibliography 


Suter, Heinrich, Nachtrage und Berichtigungen zu ' Die Mathematiker . . Abhand- 
lungenzur Geschichte der mathematischen Wissenschaften, xiv (1902), pp. 157-85. 

al-Tawhldl, Abu Hayyan, al-lmta' wa al-mu’anasa , ed. A. Amin and A. ai-Zayn, 

3 vols, Beirut, n.d. [Reprint of the Cairo ed., 1934-44.] 

al-Tawhldl, Abu Hayyan, see Rosenthal. 

Taymur, Ahmad, Khayal al-zill wa al-lu'ab wa al-tamdthil al-musawwara 'inda aW Arab , 
Cairo, 1957. 

Themistius, An Arabic Translation ofThemistius* Commentary on Aristoteles De Anima , 
ed. M. C. Lyons, Oxford, 1973. 

Theon of Alexandria, see Rome; Ver Eecke. 

Theophrastus, see Stratton. 

Toomer, G.J., Diodes on Burning Mirrors . The Arabic Translation of the lost Greek 
Original, edited with English Translation and Commentary , Berlin/Heidelberg/New 
York, 1976. 

Toomer, G.J., see also Ptolemy. 

al-Tusi, Na$ir al-Drn, Majmu e al-Rasa’il , 2 vols, Hyderabad, Dn., a.h. 1358-59 
[a.d. 1939-40]. 

al-Tusi, Na$ir al-Din, al-Risdla al-shafiya 'an al-shakk fi al-khutut al-mutawdziya. No. 8 
in al-Tusi, Majmu' al-Rasa’il. 

al-Udfuw! (=al-Adfuwi), Ja'far ibn Tha'lab, al-Tali' al-sa'id al-jami' asma ’ nujaba * 
al-sa'id , Cairo, 1966. [An earlier publication with a similar title appeared in Cairo in 

1914-] 

Ullmann, Manfred, Die Medizin im Islam, Leiden, 1970. 

Ver Eecke, Paul (trans.), see Euclide. 

Vescovini, Graziella Federici, ‘Contributo per la storia della fortuna di Alhazen in 
Italia: II volgarizzamento del MS. Vat. 4595 e il “Commentario terzo” del 
Ghiberti’, Rinascimento, 2nd series, 5 (1965), pp. 17-49. 

Vescovini, Graziella Federici, Studi sulla prospettiva medievale, Turin, 1965. 

Vitellonis Optica, see Risner. 

Vitruvius, On Architecture, ed. and trans. Frank Granger. Loeb Classical Library, 
Cambridge, Mass, and London, 2 vols, 1970. 

Vogl, S., see Bjornbo and Vogl. 

Walzer, Richard, Greek into Arabic: Essays on Islamic Philosophy, 1962. 

Walzer, Richard (ed.), Ara' = Al-Farabi on the Perfect State. A revised Text with 
Introduction, Translation and Commentary, Oxford, 1985. 

Wiedemann, Eilhard, Aufsdtze = Aufsdtze zur arabischen Wissenschafts-Geschichte, 
2 vols, Hildesheim/New York, 1970. 

Wiedemann, Eilhard, GS = Gesammelte Schriften zur arabisch-islamischen Wissenschafts- 
Geschichte, 3 vols, Frankfurt-am-Main, 1984. 


L 


Bibliography 


227 


Wiedemann, Eilhard, ‘Ibn al-Haytham, ein arabischer Gelehrter’, Festschrift J. 
Rosenthal, Leipzig, 1906, pp. 169-78. (Repr. in GS, 1, pp. 117-46.) 

Wiedemann, Eilhard, ‘Ibn al Haitams Schrift iiber die spharischen Hohlspiegel’, 
Bibliotheca Mathematica, 3rd series, 10 (1909-10), pp. 293-307. (Repr. in GS, 1, 
pp. 354 - 68 .) 

Wiedemann, Eilhard, ‘Theorie des Regenbogens von Ibn al Haitam’, Sitzungsberichte 
der Physikalisch-medizmischen Sozietat in Erlangen, 46 (1914.), pp. 39-56. (Repr. in 
Aufsdtze, 11, pp. 69-86.) 

Wiedemann, Eilhard, ‘Ueber das Leben von Ibn al Haitam und al Kindi’, Jahrbuch der 
Photographie und Reproduktionstechnik, 25 (1911), pp. 6-1 1. (Repr. in GS, 1, pp. 5 16— 
2I ') 

Wiedemann, Eilhard, ‘Uber das Licht der Sterne nach Ibn Al Haitham’, Wochenschrift 
fur Astronomie, Meteorologie und Geographie , N.S. 33 (1890), pp. 129-33. (Repr. in 
GS, 1, pp. 80-84.) 

Wiedemann, Eilhard, ‘Uber die Brechung des Lichtes in Kugeln nach Ibn al Haitam 
und Kamal al Din al Farisf , Sitzungsberichte der Physikalisch-medizinischen Sozietat in 
Erlangen, 42 (1910), pp. 15-58. (Repr. in Aufsdtze, 1, pp. 597-640.) 

Wiedemann, Eilhard, ‘Uber die Camera obscura bei Ibn al Haitam’, Sitzungsberichte der 
Physikalisch-medizinischen Sozietat in Erlangen , 46 (1914), pp. 155-69. (Repr. in 
Aufsdtze, 1, pp. 87-101.) 

Wiedemann, Eilhard, ‘Uber “Die Darlegung der Abhandlung iiber das Licht’’ von 
Ibn al Haitam’, Annalen der Physik und Chemie, N.S. 20 (1883), pp. 337-45). (Repr. 
in GS, 1, pp. 21-29.) 

Wiedemann, Eilhard, ‘Uber die Reflexion und Umbiegung des Lichtes von Na$Ir al 
Din dlTusi , Jahrbuch ftir Photographie und Reproduktionstechnik, 21 (1907), pp. 38-44. 
(Repr. in GS, 1, pp. 219-25.) 

Wiedemann, Eilhard, ‘Uber eine Schrift von Ibn al Haitam “Uber die Beschaffenheit 
der Schatten” ’, Sitzungsberichte der Physikalisch-medizinischen Sozietat in Erlangen, 39 
(1907), pp. 226-48. (Repr. in Aufsdtze, 1, pp. 377-99.) 

Wiedemann, Eilhard, ‘Uber geometrische Instrumente bei den muslimischen 
Volkern’, Zeitschrift Jiir Vermessungswesen, nos 22-23 (1910), pp. 1-8. (Repr. in GS, 
1, pp. 417-24). 

Wiedemann, Eilhard, ‘Zu Ibn al Haitams Optik’, Archiv Jiir die Geschichte der Natur- 
wissenschaften und der Technik, 3 (1910-n), pp. 1-53. (Repr. in GS, 1, pp. 541-93.) 

Wiedemann, Eilhard, ‘Zur Geschichte der BrennspiegeF, Annalen der Physik und 
Chemie, N.S. 39 (1890), pp. 110-30. (Repr. in GS, 1, pp. 59-79.) 

Wiedemann, Eilhard, see Heiberg and Wiedemann. 

Winter, H. J. J. and 'Arafat, W. ‘A Discourse on the concave spherical Mirror by Ibn 
al-Haytham’, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal, 3rd series: Science, 16 
(1950), pp. 1-6. 

Winter, H.J.J. and 'Arafat, W., ‘Ibn al-Haytham on the paraboloidal focusing 
Mirror’, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal, 3rd series: Science, 15 (1949), 
pp. 25-40. 


22 



22 H 


Bibliography 


Winter, H. J. J., see also ‘Arafat. 

Woepcke, Franz, L’algebre d’Omar Alkhayyatm, Paris, 1851. (See corrections in Suter, 
Die Mathematiker . . pp. 92—93.) 

Witelo, see Risner. 

Wolfson, H. A., ‘The internal Senses in Latin, Arabic and Hebrew philosophical 
Texts’, Harvard Theological Review , 28 (1935), pp. 69-133. 


INDEX OF MANUSCRIPTS CITED 

All references in Italic figures are to pages of the Introduction 
(Roman numerals) and Commentary (Arabic numerals). Multiple 
occurrences of manuscript references within the same page or the 
same footnote are not noted. 


A. Arabic Manuscripts 


Aligarh 
'Abdalhaiy 
21 : xxvi n. 16 

Bankipore 

Oriental Public Library 

2455: Ixxi ti.114; Ixxii n.113. 2456: Ixxii 

n. 115 

Berlin (G.D.R.) 

Deutsche Staatsbibliothek 

or. oct. 2970: 4 

Dublin 

Chester Beatty Library 
3652: xxi /ii rt. 20 

Escorial 

850: 8, 51. 927: 16 
Florence 

Medicea Laurenziana 
or. 152: xliii rt. 51 

Istanbul 
Ahmet III 

1899: lx xx rt. 130; Ixxxi; Ixxxii; Ixxxiii; 
Ixxxiv . 3329: xxxiv & n; xxxvi n. 38; xlviii 
nn. 64 & 65; 26. 3333: Ixv rt. 98; Ixix n. 110. 
3339 ( sightm : M): Ixxx n. 131 ; Ixxxi ; Ixxxii; 
2, 31, 33, 102, 132, 133 . 3340 - l xx i «• 14; 
Ixxii n. 1 15; 49, 30. 3464: 8 

Atif Efendi 

1714: xxvii rt. 18; xxviii n. 21; xlv n. 33; xlvi 
n. 39; xlviii n. 66; xlix rt. 69; 17, 18, 29 

Ayasofya 

2448 ( siglum : S): Ixxxi ; Ixxxii ; Ixxxiii ; 
Ixxxiv; 2, 31, 33, 102, 132, 133. 2598: Ixxi 
n. 1 14; Ixxii n. 113; 49. 2762: xx rt. 3 


Fatih 

3212 (siglum: Ai): Ixxxi; Ixxxii; Ixxxiii; 2, 
20, 29-31, 33, 37, 38, 47, 31, 52 , 55-57, 60, 
61. 3213 ( siglum : Ai): Ixxxi ; Ixxxii; Ixxxiii; 
2, 38, 78, 82, 84, 88, 90, 93, 97, ioi, 102. 
3214 ( siglum : Aj): Ixxxi; Ixxxii; Ixxxiii; 2, 
113, 124, 126, 130, 132, 133, 137, 139. 3215: 
xlvii n. 61; Ixxxi; Ixxxii. 3216: xxxix n. 44; 
Ixxii; Ixxxi; Ixxxii. 3439: xxvi ft. 16; xlviii 
n. 66; xlix n. 70; Ixx rt. 110 

Kopriilu 

952: Ixviii rt. 108; Ixxx rt. 130; Ixxxi; Ixxxii. 
956: Ixix-lxx n. 110. 957: Ixix rt. 110 

Laleli 

2752: xxxvii n.39. 2759: xliv n. 34; Ixiii 
rt. 93; 26 

Muallim Cevdet 

Microfilm Uppsala University Library, 
Ritter Collection, no. 15.4108: 101 

Ragip Pa§a 

934: xxxvii rt. 39; xliv rt. 34; 26 

Universite 
800: xxvii n. 19; 84 

Veliyiiddin 
2304: xxvi rt. 16 

Yeni Cami 
1179: xlvrt.36 

Jaipur 

Maharaja Mansingh II Museum 
17: Ixxii n. 115 

Jerusalem 

Khalidiyya Library 
Ixxi rt. 114; Ixxii rt. 113 


22* 


230 


Index of Manuscripts Cited 


Kuibyshev (Soviet Union) 

Lenin Regional Library 

xxv n. 13; xlviii n. 66; Ixxii n. 11 3 

Lahore 

Private Collection 

xxviii n. 23; xxx & nn; xxxvii n. 41 

Leiden 

University Library 

Or. 47: 17. Or. 201: xlviii n. 66; Ixix n. 109; 
Ixxi n.114; Ixxii n. 113; 30. Or. 680: 13. 
Or. 905: lx v n. 101 

Leningrad 

Asiatic Museum 

Or. B1030 (=Oriental Institute 89): xlix 
n. 70; lx n. 87 

London 

British Library 

Additional 7474: 15. Additional 7475: 
13. Or. 6669: 16 
India Office Library 

Loth 734: xl n. 46; xlii n. 30; xliii n. 31; xlix 
n. 70 

Manisa (Turkey) 

Genel 1706: xxv n. 14 

Mawsil 
Jami' al-Basha 
287: Ixx n. 110 


New York 

Columbia University 

Plimpton Or. 301: Ixxi n. 114; Ixxii n. 113 

Oxford 

Bodleian Library 
Marsh 119: Ixxii n. 116 

Hatton Or. 34: xlv n. 36 

Paris 

Bibliotheque Nationale 
ar. 2460: Ixxx n. 130. ar. 2516: Ixx n.110. 
ar. 2853: 8. ar. 3008: Ixvi tin. 103 & 104; 
Ixvii nn. 103 & 106 

Princeton 

University Library 
Yahuda 3517: lx n. 88 

Rampur 

Raza Library 

6444M: Ixix n. 109; Ixxii n. 113. 9267M: 
Ixix n. 109; Ixxii n. 113 

Tehran 

Majlis-i Shura-i Mill! 

2451: Ixxii n. 113; 49, 30 

University Library 

493 : xxxvii n. 41. 2136: Ixxi n. 112 

Vatican City 

Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana 
Vat. Hebr. 378: xxxvii n. 39; xlv n. 36 


B. Latin Manuscripts 


Bruges 

Bibliotheque Publique 
512: Ixxiv n. 120 

Cambridge 

Peterhouse 

209 (=11.10.63): Ixxiv n. 120 

Trinity College 

1311 (0.5.30): Ixxiv n. 120 

Edinburgh 

Royal Observatory 

CR3.3 [=<HI 1-3(20)] ( siglum : Li): Ixxiv 
n. 120; Ixxviii; 2, 31, 39, 60, 76, 77, 82-84, 
86, 90-92, 141 

Florence 

Biblioteca Nazionale 
Magliabechi XX.52: Ixxiv n. 120 

London 

British Library 

Royal 12.G.VII (siglum: L*): Ixxiv n. 120; 


Ixxviii; 2, 31, 39, 60, 76, 77, 82-84, ^ > 
90-92, 141. Sloane 306: Ixxiv n. 120 
Royal College of Physicians 
383: Ixxiv n. 120 

Oxford 

Bodleian Library 

Corpus Christi College 150: Ixxiv n. 120 
Paris 

Bibliotheque Nationale 
lat. 7247: Ixxiv n. 120; Ixxviii. 
lat. 16199: Ixxiv n. 120 

Vatican City 

Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana 
Pal.lat.1355: Ixxiv n. 120. Vat.lat.4595: 
Ixxv nn. 122 & 123 

Vienna 

Osterreichische Nationalbibliothek 
5322: Ixxiv n. 120; Ixxviii; Ixxix 


GENERAL INDEX 


For the text of the Optics this Index should be used in conjunction with the Synopsis 
(Introduction, sec. VIII), which it complements. Figures in roman type (I, 7(7]) refer to the 
paragraphs of the Translation; figures in italic (i,i) to the pages of the Introduction and 
Commentary, respectively. 

In alphabetization of Arabic names and titles the definite article ‘a/-’, though printed, is 
always ignored. 

Titles are often abbreviated in the Index; Kitdb (Book) and Maqdla (Treatise) are usually 
omitted, especially at the beginning of a title, or else abbreviated as K. and M. 

A few Arabic, Greek and Latin words have been indexed, but only when they are discussed in 
the Introduction or Commentary. For Arabic and Latin words see also Glossaries. 


'Abd al-IIamid, M-, 38 

'Abd al-Jabbar: on errors of vision, 107-111 ; 

his al-Mughni, 107 
'Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi, 38 
'Abd al-Mu’min, xx 
'Abd al-Rahman ibn 'Isa, xxxi 
'Abd al-Salam al-Rukn, xxn. 4 
Abed, S., xiv 
Abel, A., xli n. 48 
‘aberration, spherical’, xlv 
Abu 'Abd Allah al-Basri, 107 
Abu Bakr al-Razi, see al-Razi 
Abu Bishr Matta ibn Yunus, xlvi n. 37; 12, 
64 

Abu al-Hasan al-Ja'fari, xxxvii n. 39 
Abu Hashim al-Jubba’i: 109; his al-lhdm, 
107 

Abu Ma'shar, 1 7 

abu qalamun: (the cloth called), colours of 
change with light, I, 4(25] & n; (the species 
called), rainbow colours of manifest in sub- 
dued light, II, 3(218] & nn. See also irises; 
peacocks’ feathers 

Abu al-Qasim ibn al-wazir 'All ibn Isa, 

Ixviii n. 108 

Abu al-Qasim al-Sumaysati, xxxvii n. 39 
Abu Rida, M. *A., 64 

Abu Sa'd al-'Ala’ ibn Sahl: lii-liii & n; al- 
Burhdn ' aid anna al-falak laysa Jt ghayat 
al-saja , lix-lx & n 
Ackrill, J. L., 71 

aerial perspective. III, 7(193-194]; 109, 110, 
136. See also: chromatic perspective; 
fog; smoke 


aestimare/hadasa, 90 
aestimatio/hads, 80. See also conjecture 
aestimatio/wahm, aestimativa/al-wah- 
miyya, 64, 63 

Aetius, Ixvii; his Placita philosophorum, Iviii 
n. 81 

' Afifi, Abu *l-'Ela, xv 
Afnan, S., 64, 84 

after-images, I, 4(3—4, 6], 6(91-92]; III, 6(27, 
28] 

Ahmad ibn 'Isa: xxxii n.31, xxxvii n.39, 
xliv n. 34, Iviii ; 27; his Optics /al-Mandzir wa 
al-mardya al-muhriqa, xxxvi— xxxvii & n.39, 
lix & n, Ixiii n. 93, Ixvii & n, Ixx n. 110, Ixxi, 
n. 112; 23, 26 

Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Ja'far, al- 
'Askari, I, 8[ 1 1 ]; II, 4(37]; Ixxx & n 
al-Akfani, Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn 
Sa'id al-Ansari, his Irshad al-qdsid, Ixviii 
n. 108 

al-'Ala* ibn Sahl, see Abu Sa'd. . .ibn 
Sahl 

'Alam al-Din ibn Abi al-Qasim, see 
Qaysar ibn Abi al-Qasim 
albugineous humour (al-rutuba al-baydiyya): 

description of, I, 5(12, 22]; uses of, I, 7(3] 
Alexander of Aphrodisias: 64; his Com- 
mentary on Aristotle’s Meteorology, xlvi & n 
Alfarabi, see al-Farabl 
Alhazen: xi, xii, xiv; ‘Alhazen’s problem’, 
xiii, Ixiv n. 94, Ixxxv n. 137; see also Ibn 
al-Haytham 

'All ibn al-' Abbas, his K. al-Malakt, Ixvi 
'All ibn 'Isa al-Asturlabi, Ixviii n. 108 


232 


General Index 


General Index 


233 


'AH ibn 'Isa, al-Jarrah, al-wazir, Ixuiii 
n. 108 

'Ali ibn 'Isa al-Kahhal, Ixui, Ixvii n. 108; 58 
'All ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari, Ixui 
Alkindus, see al-Kindi 
Allan, J. W., 42 
amara, see sign(s) 

Amin, 'U., luiii n. 80 
Ammar al-Mawsill, Ixui 
anatomists, see eye; medicine 
Anaxagoras, 36 

Anthemius: xliii; his On. . .burning Mirrors, 
xxxvii n.3 9, xliu & n, Ixiii n.93; his On 
paradoxical Devices , xliv n. 34 
Anthimus, xliv n. 34; see also Anthemius 
Apollonius: xlvii n.61; his Conics, xx n.3, 
xxv n. 14, xliv 
'aql, 63, 64, 63 

'Arafat, W., xli n.47, xlii n.30, xliii n.31, 
Ixxi, n. 112 

aranea ( al-ankabutiyya ) description of, I, 
5(10]; uses of, I, 7(3, 5, 6] 

Archimedes: xxxvii n.39, xliii, xliv n.34. 
Works: Catoptrics, Ivi n. 78; Sphere and 
Cylinder, 60 

Aristotle, ps.-A., Aristu(talis), Aristo- 
telian, Aristotelianism: xiii n. 12, xxxiv 
n.32, l n.71, li, Hi, Iv, Ixiii n.93; 8, 13, 14, 
21, 23, 24, 39, 64, 63, 106. Works: al-Ahjar, 
39; Categories, 71; De anima, 63, 68, 79, 83, 
88, 104; De coloribus, 40, 39; De interpre- 
tatione, 71; De memoria, 83 ; De sensu, 83, 88; 
Mantiq, 12, 71; Meteorology, xxiii n.12, 
xxxvii n.39, xlu-xlviii & nn; 7, 43; Parva 
naturalia, 63; Physics, 3; Politics, Ixvii; Pos- 
terior Analytics, 3,11, 12, 64; Prior Analytics, 
11; Problemata/ Problems, xlix, l n.71; 
Topics, 13; Minor Works, 39 
Aristyllus, 13 
'Arshi, I. 'A., Ixxii n. 1 13 
Artificer, The: mercy of, I, 7(9 & n, 18]; 
wisdom and skill of, I, 7(13, 18]; perfection 
of, I, 7(18] 

al-'Askari, see Ahmad ibn Muhammad 
ibnja'far 
atomists, 23 
Autolycus, xxi n. 3 
Avene tan, Ixiu 

Averroes (Ibn Rushd, ‘the grandson’): xlvi 
n.57; 7; on the internal cognitive faculties, 
63-66; on the rainbow, xluii-xluiii; 6-7. See 
also Ibn Rushd, ‘the grandfather’. Works: 
Epitome [Talkhis] of Aristotle’s Parva 


naturalia, 63; al-Kulliyydt/Colliget, 7; In 
Libros Meteorologicorum Expositio media, xlv 
n.36, xlvii-xluiii, Ixiv & n; 6; Tahajut al- 
Tahdjut. 71 

Avicenna, Ibn SIna: xxiv, 10, 21, 23; on the 
internal cognitive faculties, 64-63; on al- 
wahmiyya/aestimativa, 63, 66; on mand/ 
intentio, 72-73. Works: De anima, Ixvii; 8, 
64, 63, 71, 72, 140; al-Qanun, Ixvi; 42; 
al-ShiJd\ Ixvi; 141; e Uyun al-hikma, Ixvi, 
Ixvii 

axis of radial (visual) cone ( sahm makhrut 
al-shua *): defined, II, 2(2]; position of, II, 
2(19-23]; called ‘axis of ray’ (sahm al-shu'd'), 
II, 2(23]; role of in perception, II, 3(128, 
133], in estimating distance, II, 3(156, 158], 
in estimating size, II, 3(164-166], in ascer- 
tained perception, II, 4(6-7, 8, 9, 10], in 
distinct vision. III, 2(61, 79], 3(7]. See also 
common axis; ray 
Azhar Mosque, xx, xxii 
'Azzawi, 'A., 27 


Baarmann, J., li n. 73 
Bachmann, P., xxx n. 26 
Bacon, Roger, xi, Ixxiii 
Baconian language, 10 
Badawl, 'A., xlv n.36, xlvi n. 37 ; 12, 42, 43, 
59 , 63, 7i 

al-Baghdadi, see 'Abd al-Latif al-B. 
Baneth, D. H., xx n. 4 
Barrow, Isaac, xi, Ixxxv n. 137 
al-Battani, 16 

al-Bayhaql, xxxi & nn, Ixv & n; 27 
al-bayt al-muzlim, lii, Ixxvi. See also 
camera obscura phenomena 
beauty ( al-husn ): perception of, II, 3(200- 
231]; kinds of, II, 3(201]; combination 
(iqtiran, 1 ijtima) of visible properties as cause 
of, II, 3(224, 225, 226], see also conjunction; 
composition ( tarkib , ta'tif) of visible 
properties as cause of, II, 3(201, 205, 223, 
228]; conjunction ( iqtiran ) of visible proper- 
ties as cause of, II, 3(201, 223, 225, 230, 
231]; reduced to proportionality and har- 
mony, II, 3(230]; harmony (ta'alluf) as 
cause of, II, 3(201, 226, 230, 231]; pro- 
portionality (tandsub) as cause of, I, 3(205, 
226-228, 230-231], discussed, 98-100; in 
script, II, 3(205, 221, 223, 229]; relativity 
of, II, 3(222, 226, 230, 231]; mistakenly 


perceived, III, 7(54-55, 96-97, 98-99. 
124-126, 156-158, 185-188, 211-212, 

244-246]; perception of discussed, 97-101 ; 
wazn in, 99, 10 1 . sense of beauty: pro- 
duced by visible properties singly, II, 
3(202-222, 231]; produced by visible 

properties in conjunction, II, 3(223-225, 
230, 231]; produced by proportionality and 
harmony of the visible properties, II, 
3(226-231] 

Bekker, I., 63 
Bergh, S. van den, 71 
Bergstrasser, G., xxiii n. 11 
al-Biruni, his al-Jamahir, 17, 41, 42; al-Qanun 
al-Mas'udi, 17 
Bjornbo, A., luiii n. 82; 6 
Block, I., 104 
Blumberg, H., 63 
Boardman, H., xv 
Bowen, H., Ixviii n. 108 
Boyer, Carl B,, xlvii nn. 60 & 61 
Brockelmann, C., xvi, xxii n. 8, xxxvii 
n. 41, xliii n.31, Ixxi n. 112, /xxx n. 130 
bu'd/dimensio, 92 
bu'd/remotio, see distance 


calligraphy, Arabic, 97, 99-100, 101-102 
camera obscura phenomena, xlix-li & 
n. 72, liii. See also al-bayt al-muzlim 
Centre, the (of binocular vision): defined. III, 
2(17]; illustrated, 114, 117 
certainty (mutayaqqan/muhaqqaq), meaning 
of in theory of perception, II, 3(77], 4(35] 
chamaileon, chameleon, see abu qalamun 
Cherniss, H., xlii n. 49 
Chevalley, C., 70 
chromatic contrast, see colour 
chromatic perspective, 137, 140. See also 
aerial perspective 

circle of intersection ( dairat al-taqatu) I, 
5(21, 24-26]; 47 
Clagett, Marshall, Ixxiv & n 
Cohen, I. Bernard, xiv 
Cohen, M. R-, Ivi n. 78 
coloration, II, 3(54]; III, 5(1] 
colours (alwan): radiation of from shining 
opaque objects experimentally examined, 
I, 3(113-128]; projection of on facing 
objects not perceived by reflection, I, 3 
[ 1 22-1 23]; of transparent bodies accom- 
pany traversing lights, I, 3(124-127]; forms 


of always accompany forms of light, I, 
3(129-131); question of objectivity of, I, 
3(132-133]; 22; objective reality of estab- 
lished, I, 3(134-139]; extension of indepen- 
dent of the presence or mediation of eye, I, 
3(138-141]; perception of varies with light, 
I, 4(20-26]; perceived by pure sensation, see 
pure sensation; quiddity ( ma iyya ) of per- 
ceived by recognition, II, 3(49); 
proportionateness or harmony of, 139-140; 
weaken and fade with distance, I, 3(114- 
12 1, 124]; III, 7(19]; of deep transparent 
water, III, 7(182-183]; of self-luminous 
bodies, I, 2(12 & n, 21], 3(113]. bright 
colours (al-alwan al-mushriqa), examples 
of, I, 3(114, 125], 4(6, 20]. chromatic 
colours. III, 6(27] & n. strong colours, 
examples of, I, 4(22]; II, 3(53]. colour assi- 
milation, III, 7(20]. colour contrast, I, 
6(113, 114 & n, 1 1 5]; 57. colour names 
and colour adjectives, discussed, 40-44; 
colour saturation ( shab '), I, 4(23] & n; III, 
5(7] & n; 42, 43-44 . See also radiation of 
colours; irises 

common axis, defined. III, 2(12] 
common notions, see notions 
common sense, 63, 64, 63. See also sense 
common sensibles, <55 

comparison ( qiyas ), distinguished from pure 
sensation, II, 3(1-12]. See also inference 
conjecture (hads), role of in perception/ 
recognition, II, 3(81, 87-89, 92-93, 105, 
no, in, 1 12, 1 16, 146, 161); III, 7(17] 
conjunctiva (al-multahima): described, I, 5(5, 
16-17, 20, 38]; uses of, I, 7(14] 
contemplation ( ta'ammul ): role of in esti- 
mating distance, II, 3(156], and size, II, 
3(166-167], in perception of roughness, II, 
3(191], and smoothness, II, 3(192, 194]- See 
also perception 

contiguity ( al-tamdss ), see continuity 
continuity ( al-ittisal ), perception of, II, 
3(175-176] 

cornea (al-qamiyya): described, I, 5(8, 18-23, 
28-29]; uses of, I, 7(2] 

Crombie, A. C., 31 

crystalline = c. humour (al-rutuba al - 
jaltdiyya): described, I, 5[9“i 5* 24-29, 33]; 
centre of, see centre of eye; as instrument of 
vision, I, 6(14-15, 64]; transparency and 
density of, I, 6(64]; II, 2(18]; effect of light 
and colour on, I, 6(66]; sensitive power of, 
I, 6(65], explained, 53-541 as place where 


234 


General Index 


235 


sensation ‘begins’, II, 2[io]; senses forms 
along radial lines only, I, 6(82]; mode of 
reception of light and colour by, I, 6(90]; II, 
2[ 1 1 ] & n; 34 ; painful effect of light on, I, 
6(67] & n; uses of, I, 7(5]; composition and 
varying transparency of, II, 2(8]. See also 
sentient organ 


al-Dabbagh, G., 60 

Daiber, H., Iviii n. 81, Ixvii n. 103 

Damian us of Larissa, 105 

darkness ( al-zulma ), perception of, II, 3(199] 

daw’/lux vs. nur/lumen, 21, 23 

De crepusculis, see Ibn Mu'adh 

Democritus, Ixvii; 106 

density /ghilaz/spissitudo, 61, 22, 76. See 
also opacity 

depth perception, see distance; oppo- 
sition; solidity 

Descartes, Rene, xi; Dioptrique, Meteores, Ixi 
n. 89 

designs ( nuqush ), meaning of, I, 2(22] & n; 

103, 136, 137, 138, 139. See also drawing 
De triangulis, Ixxiv — see also Jordanus de 
Nemore 

De Young, G. xv 
dianoia, 64 
Dilgan, H., 60 

Diodes, On burning Mirrors, xliv & n 
Diogenes Laertius, 36 
Dioscorides, 39 

direction (Jiha ): perception of, II, 3(95-100]; 
in seeing and hearing, II, 3(98]; and the 
argument from specular images, II, 3(99]. 
See also jiha; opposition 
discernment ( tamyiz ), performed by the 
faculty of judgement, II, 3(48). See also 
judgement 

dissimilarity ( al-ikhtilaf ), perception of, II, 
3 [ 2 34 ] 

distance ( bud) (as a condition of visibility): 
varies with the visible object’s size, I, 
2(13-14]; varies with the light in the object, 
I, 2(14-15); varies with the object’s colour, 
I, 2(16-18]; varies with the power of sight, 
I, 2(19]. moderate and immoderate dis- 
tances (al-ab e dd al-mu e tadila, al-ab e ad al- 
kharija e an al-i'tiddl), defined, I, 2(25]; III, 
7(14, 132]. distance (as a visible property): 
perception of, II, 3(67-93] & n; perception 
of through fog, III, 7(194]; role of in 


estimating size, II, 3(135-148] — see also 
size; sensory experiences involved in per- 
ception of, 81. moderate distances, their 
magmtudes correctly perceptible, II, 3(77, 
86, 89-91]; defined, II, 3(160, 174]. maxi- 
mum moderate distance, dependence of 
on object’s orientation, II, 3(169], immo- 
derate distances, their magnitudes not 
correctly perceived, II, 3(78]; III, 7(3]; 
defined, II, 3(160], moderate and immo- 
derate distances, perceptions of com- 
pared, II, 3(157-160]. magnitude of 
distance, distinguished from distance as 
such, II, 3(68—69]; perception of depends on 
intervening bodies, II, 3(76-85, 89-92, 
149-1 56]; inferred (istadalla) from perceived 
size of object, II, 3(161] 

Djebbar, A., Ixiv n. 94 
Dozy, R., Ixiv n. 94 
Drabkin, I. E., Ivi n. 78 
drawing ( nuqush ) as pattern, II, 3(44] &n. See 
also designs 
Druart, T.-A., xiv 
Dubler, C., 39 
Duqlis, see Empedocles 
dynamis kritike, 64 
dynamis logike, 64 


Eastwood, B., Ixxiv n. 121, 31 
eidos: 68; see also form 
Empedocles, Ixvii n. 103 
empeiria, see tajriba 
epagoge, 11-13 
Epicurus, Ixvii 

errors of sight ( aghldt al-basar): causes of. III, 
3(1-34]; classification of. III, 4(1-9]; exam- 
ples of. III, 4(5—8]; 130 ; combined causes of 
illustrated. III, 7(280-285]; 141-142 ; kinds 
of. III, 7(287]; in kaldm, 107-1 11. errors in 
pure sensation: ways of. III, 5(1-3]; 
explained with reference to conditions of 
veridical vision. III, 5(4—15], errors in 
recognition: generally described. III, 
6[ r — 3 ]; explained with reference to condi- 
tions of veridical vision. III, 6(4-3 *]- errors 
in inference: classification of. III, [1]; 
explained with reference to conditions of 
veridical vision, III, 7(2-278], see also 
Synopsis, Bk III, ch. 7, for errors relating to 
particular visible properties. See also 
‘moon illusion' 


General Index 

Ersch, J. S., xx n. 4 
Ettinghausen, R., 97 

Euclid: liv, Iv. Works: Data, xxi n.3; 
Elements, xxi n.3, xxii, xxv n. 13, xxxvii 
n. 39; Optics, xxi n. 3, xxxii, xxxvii nn. 39 & 
40, liii, lx n.88, Ixiii n.93, Ixvii & n, Ixxv, 
Ixxx n.130; 8, 61, 93, 103, 106, no ; 
Phenomena, xxi n. 3. 
ps. -Euclid, Catoptrics, xxxii n. 31 
Eugenius, lx n. 88, Ixxv, Ixxvii 
Eutocius, xlvii n. 61 

experiment, experimental examination 
(i'tibar/experimentatio): in text, passim-, 
discussed, 10-19, 90, 93 ; as a method of 
achieving certainty ( yaqtn ), III, 2(1, 25]. 
accurate experiment ( itibdr muharrar ): I, 
2(6], 3(29, 48], 6(36]; 19, 20,33 ; as a method 
of achieving certainty ( yaqxn ), I, 3(29). 
ascertained experiment ( muhaqqaq ), I, 
6(36] 

extension in the three dimensions, percep- 
tion of, see solidity 

eye, the (al-basar): passim; composition of, I, 
5(1-12]; anatomists on the composition of, 
I, 5(39], see also medicine; centre of and of 
eye’s layers, I, 5(19-37], 6(23, 25, 28, 29, 
39, 40, 41, 42, 44, 46, 55]; geometrization 
of* 45 ~ 5 1 ; order and transparency of layers, 
I, 5(13]; picture of, I, 5(39]; tunics of, 46-48; 
two eyes beautify face, I, 7(9] 
eyeball (jumlat al-ayn), I, 7(15] 
eyelashes, I, 7(17] 
eyelids, I, 7(16] 


faculty of judgement, see judgement 
fahm, 68, 84 

al-Farabi: on optics, Ivi-lviii; on istiqra and 
tsafjuh, 13-14. Works: al-Alfiz, 13; Ara , 
64; Falsafat Aristutdlis, 64; Ihsa /Catalogo de 
las ciencias/De scientiis, Ivi, Iviii, n. 80; 6, 99; 
Rasail, 64; Tahsil al-saada, 64 
Federici Vescovini, G., xii, Ixxiv n. 120, 
Ixxv n. 122; 97 

figure ( hay' a ), II, 3(127, 129, 1 32-1 34]. See 
also shape 
fikr/dianoia, 64 
firefly, I, 4(16], 6[uo]; III, 6(12] 

Flugel, G., lix n. 84 

fog. III, 7(193-199, 202-205, 206, 207, 21 1, 
213]. See also smoke 


form(s) (sura, suwar/forma, formae): in text, 
passim; discussed, xlix-li; 68-70; of col- 
ours), I, 3(113, 1 14, 118, 119, 121-123, 
129-134, 136, 138-144]* 4(6], 6(2, 3, 4, 
7-10, 16, 42, 44, 50, 53, 54, 60]; of light(s), 
I, 3(113* n8, 121, 129, 13 1, 141-143]* 4(3* 
4, 6], 6(3, 4, 7-10, 16, 42, 44, 50, 53* 54* 60]; 
ofpoint(s) of colour, I, 6(12, 13, 16, 19, 20, 
22, 25, 27-29, 37, 38, 41, 42, 55] — see also 
form as point-image (Q; of point(s) of 
light, I, 6(12, 13, 16, 19, 20, 22-25, 27-29, 
37, 38, 41,- 42, 55] — see also form as 
point-image (Q; of a visible object as a 
pattern of light and colour or as a physical 
optical array (M p ), I, 1(3], 6(30, 31, 32, 33, 
46, 58, 62, 68]; II, 3(100]; III, 2(15]; 33, 69; 
as total appearance of an object or the sum 
of an object’s visible properties (F a ), 69, 72; 
meaning nature, I, 3(20, 98], 6(87]; II, 2(8]; 
III, 6(28, 29]; as a property of a physical 
point (point-form: f p ), I, 3(134, 136, 139]; 
Iv; 32, 73; as a total optical image (Mj), 33, 
69, 70, 72, 73; as a sensory point-image (f s ), 
73-74; as a total and distinct sensed image 
(M s ), 33, 70, 74, 80-81; as a ‘quality’ or hue 
of a colour, I, 3(132] & n; as a painted 
picture, 136, 137. accidental form, li, lii; 
28. ascertained form (s. muhaqqaqa ): II, 
4(3”5* 14]- essential form, li, lii; 20. pri- 
mary form: of colour, I, 6(99, 100, 104, 
106]; of light, I, 6(105], secondary form: 
of colour, I, 6(99, 100, 101, 103, 104, 107], 
8(9]; of light, I, 6(105], 8(9]. form as 
point-image (Q, 32, 33, 73, 74, 79. true 
form: characterized, II, 4(2-5]; ascertained 
only by contemplation and scrutiny, II, 
4(2-4, 9, 18]; 103, 104; see also perception, 
true, universal form, II, 4(12, 16, 17, 19, 

23,42] 

Frank, R., 71 
Frederick II, xxi 
Friedlein, G., Ivi n. 79 
frontality (muwajaha), II, 3(102-103], See 
also position 


Galen, Galenic, Galenism: xxxiv n.32, liv, 
Ixiii n.93; l 4f 18, 44, 46, 33, 103, 140. 
Works: De anatomicis administrationibus/On 
anatomical Procedures, xxxiv n. 32; 30, 51; De 
libris propriis, xxiii & n; De methodo medendi, 
xxiii n. 11; Depulsibus (magnum)/K. al-Nabd 



2j6 


General Index 


237 


al-kabir, xxiii n. 11; De usu partium/ 
Usefulness of the Parts of the Body, xxxiv 
n.32, lx ini n. 105; 8, 46, 47, 50, 51, 60; On 
Demonstration, xxxiv n.32; On Diseases of 
the Eye, xxxiv n. 32 
Gauthier, L., 7 
Gem in us, Ivi 

Gerard of Cremona, xliii n.51, Iviii n.80, 
Ixv n. 97, Ixxiii & n, Ixxvi; 6 
al-Ghazali, his Ihya , 97; al-Munqidh, 37, 63 
Ghiberti, Lorenzo: xi; 97; his Commentarii, 
Ixxv & n 

Gillispie, C. C., xxii n. 10 
Goitein, S. D., xx n. 4 
Goldstein, B., Ixxvi n. 127; 66 
Gombrich, E. H., xiv 
green, see misanni 
Gregory of Nyssa, St., Ixvii 
Gruber, J. O., xx n. 4 
Giidemann, M., Ixiv n. 94 
Guerlac, H., 40 

Guerruccio di Clone Federighi, Ixxv & n 
Guthrie, W. K. C., 36 


Haarmann, U., xxx n. 26 
hadasa, see aestimare 
hajar al-misann, 58 
al-Hajjaj ibn Yusuf ibn Matar, 14 
hajm, 139 

al-Hakim, xix, xxii, xxiv, xxxi 

Hamlyn, D. W., 68 
Haqqi, I., 27 

harmony, see beauty; colour; proportion- 
ality 

Hartner, W., 16 

Harun, *A., 12 

Hasan, S. M., xxii n. 8 

Hasan ibn Shakir, Ixxx n. 130 

Haschmi, M. Y., xliv n. 34 

al-hass/sentiens, 67-68, 96, 103, 132, 137. 

See also sentient 
al-Hassan, A. Y., 38 
hay ’a, 93, 103, 130, 133. See also figure 
Heath, T. L., xlvii n. 61 
hegemonikon, 66 

Heiberg, J. L., xliii n. 31, xliv n . 34; 13 
Heinen, A., xxviii n.23, xxx n.26, xxxvii 
n. 41 

Heinrichs, Wolfhart, xv 
Helmbold, W. C., xlii n. 49 
Helmholtz, H. von, 1, 120 


General Index 


Heraclitus, 106 
Hero of Alexandria, Ivi & n 
Hett, W. S., / n. 71 
Hipparchus, Ixvii n. 103; 13 
Hippocrates, Ixiii n. 93 
Hirschberg, J., Ixvi nn. 102 & 103 
Hogendijk, J. P., xxv n. 14, Ixiv n. 94 
Hooke, Robert, 39 
horopter, 124 
Huisman, A. J. W., 43 
humours of eye, see under name of humour 
Hunayn ibn Ishaq: xxiii n. 11, xlvi n. 37; on 
modes of vision, 82-83. Works: K. 
al-'Ayn, Ixvii; Ten Treatises, Iviii n. 80, Ixvi; 
46, 31, 82 ; Trans, of Galen's De usu partium, 
5i- 

Huxley, G. L., xliv n. 34 
Huygens, Christiaan, xi, Ixxxv n. 137 


Ibn Abi Sadiq, 30 

Ibn Abi Usaybfa, xi ii, xix & n, xx nn. 3 &4, 
xxi & n, xxii & nn, xxiii & n, xxv n. 13, xxvi 
n. 16, xxix, xxx & nn, xxxi & n, xxxii, 
xxxiv & n, Ixviii & n 

Ibn al-A c rabi, 71 
Ibn A'yan al-Basri, Ixvii 
Ibn al-Bawwab, 1 00 
Ibn al~Bitriq, xlv & n 
Ibn Butlan, Ixvi 
Ibn Durayd, 41 
Ibn Faris, Ahmad, 12, 71 
Ibn al-Haytham (I. H., see also Alhazen): 
xi-lxxxvii passim; 1-142 passim; names of, I, 
8[ 1 1 ); II, 4(37]; III, 7(289]; xii, xxxiv & n, 
Ixxv n. 123; intellectual development of, 
xxiii n. 12; life and works of, xix-xxxii; 
writings of on light and vision described, 
xxxii-liii; on obstacles to scientific dis- 
covery, I, i[i] & n. Works: Adwa al- 
kawakib/On the Lights of the Stars, xxvii, 
xxxiii, xl, xli & n; Ajwibat sab' masd’il 
ta'limiyya etc., xxiv n. 13; Alat al-zill 
etc. /On the Shadow Instrument, xlviii; ' Amal 
al-musabba' fi al-dd’ira, xxvii; M. mukhtasara 
fi al-Ashkdl al-hildliyya, xxvii; M. mustaqsdh 
fi al-Ashkdl al-hildliyya, xxvii; al-Athar all- 
adht fi wajh al-qamar — see Md ’iyyat al-athar 
etc.; M. fi al-Binkam, 17; al-Burhan . . . fi 
ahkam al-nujum, xxiv ; Commentary on the 
Almagest, xxxiii-xxxvii &nn, xlviii &n, lix 
& n, Ixx n. 110, Ixxi n. 112; M. fi al-Daw'/ 


Discourse on Light, xxvi, xxxiii, li & n-liii, 
Ixii, Ixxi, Iv, lx; 4—3, 8-9, 17, 19, 21, 22; 
Daw * al-qamar/On the Light of the Moon, 
xxvi, xxxiii, xl & n; 17, 29; De aspectibus — 
see K. al-Manazir/The Optics, Latin 
translation of; Hall shakk 'ala Uqlidisjial-m. 
al-khamisa etc., xxv n. 13; Hall shakk fi al-m. 
al-thaniya 'ashra min k. Uqlidis, xxv n. 13; 
Hall shakk fi mujassamat K. Uqlidis, xxv 
n. 13; Hall shukuk fi K. al-Majistf etc., xxvi 
& n, Ixx n. 110; Hall shukuk harakat al-iltijaf 
xxviii, Ixv n. 98; Hall shukuk K. Uqltdis etc., 
xxv n. 13, xxvii n. 19; 84; Hall shukuk al-m. 
al-ula min K. al-Majisti, xxvii; Hall shukuk 
al-m. al-uld min K. Uqltdis, xxv n. 13; Hara- 
kdt al-iltijaf xxviii, Ixv n.98; Hay'at 
al-'Alam, xxix; Kitab al-Hay’a (? = Hay’at 
al-'alam), xx n.4; Hay’at harakat ... al- 
kawdkib al-saUa, xxv & n; K. ji Hisab al - 
mu'dmaldt, xxix; M. fi Hisab al-mu'amalat, 
xxix; Istikhraj irtija ' al-qutb * ala ghayat al- 
tahqiq/Oti the Determination of the Pole’s Alti- 
tude with perfect Precision, 17; Istikhraj 
muqaddamat diT al-musabba' , xt hi; Ikhtildfal- 
manazir, xxxiv n.32; Ikhtildf matizar al- 
qamar, xxxiv n. 32; Istikhraj nisf al-nahar, 
xxvii; Jawdb mas \ ala fi al-misaha, xxv; Jawhar 
al-basar, xxxiii; Kayfiyyat al-azlal/On the 
Quality of Shadows, xxvi, xxxiii, xlviii-xlix, 
Ixii, Ixxi; 18, 29; Khawass al-qitj al-mukdji’, 
xxx; Khawass al-qitj al-za’ id, xxx; M.fianna 
al-kura awsa' al-ashkdl al-mujassama etc. /On 
that the Sphere is the largest of the solid Figures 
with equal Peripheries, xxvii; 60; al-Kura al - 
muhriqa/On the burning Sphere, xxvi, xxviii, 
xxxiii, xlii, xlv & n, Ixii; 17; Khutut al-sd'dt, 
xxvii, xxviii & n; Ma’iyyt al-athar alladht fi 
wajh al-qamar, xxvi, xxvii, xxxiii, xl, xli & 
n-xlii; al-Makan, xxvii; al-Ma' lu mat, xxvii . 
K. al-Manazir/The Optics: xi-xiv, xxvi- 
Ixxxvii passim; cited, 1-142 passim; aim and 
method of, 1, 1 [6]; replaces earlier treatise of 
I.H’s, I, 7(8]; aim and scope of, liii-ixiii; 
compared with Ptolemy's Optica , Ix-lxi; 
Arabic mss. of, Ixxx-lxxxiii; Latin mss. of, 
lx xiv n. 120; Italian translation of, Ixxiv- 
Ixxv & n. 122 ; Latin translation of, Ixxiii- 
Ixxix & nn; Risner's edition, Ixxv-lxxix, 
cited, 44-103, 113-116, 124-131 passim; 

transmission of in the Islamic world, Ixiv- 
Ixviii. 

M. fi al-Mandzir ‘ aid tarlqat Batlamyiis / 
Treatise on Optics according to the Method of 


Ptolemy, xxx n. 27, xxxiii , liii; al-Marayd 
al-muhriqa, xxxiii; al-Marayd al-muhriqa bi- 
al-dawa’ir/On spherical burning Mirrors, 
xxxiii, xlii & n-xlv; al-Marayd al-muhriqa 
bi-al-qutu /On parabolic burning Mirrors, 
xxxiii, xlii-xlv & n.31; Mas'ala fi ikhtildf 
al-manazir, xxxiV n.32; Masala fi al-misaha, 
xxv; Misahat al-kura , xxviii; Misahat al- 
mujassam al-mukafi\ xxviii; ‘ Note on 
Refraction’ , xxxvii n. 39; ' Notes’ (quoted by 
al-ShirazI), Ixx n. 110 — see Hall shukuk fi 
K. al-Majisti; Perspectiva — see K. al- 
Manazir/The Optics, Latin translation of; 
Prospettiva , see K. al-Manazir/The 

Optics, Italian translation of; Qaws quzah 
wa al-hala/On the Rainbow and the Halo, 
xxxiii, xlvi & n, Ixiv; 4, 3, 6; Rasa'il, xvi, xl 
n. 46, xli n.47, xlii n.30, xliii n.31, xliv 
n. 32, li n. 73; Reply to a geometrical Question 
etc., xxiV ; Risala ila ... Ibn al-Tayyib etc., 
xxiv n. 13; al-Rukhama al-ujuqiyya , xxvii; 
Rufat al-kawdkib/On the Appearance of the 
Stars, xxviii, xxxiii, xxxvii-xxxix & nn; 
Sharh al-Majistt wa talkhlsuh, xxiv, xxxv — 
see also Commentary on the Almagest; 
Sharh musddardt K. Uqltdis fi al-Usul, xxv; 
84; al-Shukuk ‘ ala Batlamyus /Dubitationes in 
Ptolemaeum, xxvi, xxviii , xxxiii, xxxv n. 37, 
xxxix , liii; 3, 4, 13, 17 , 83, 125-126; Surat 
al-kusuf/On the Form of the Eclipse, xxvi, 
xxxiii, xlix, Ixii, Ixxi; 70; Tahdhtb al- 
Majisti, xxiv ; K. fi al-Tahlil wa al-tarklb, 
xxix; Kitab jama'tu fihi al qawl * ala Tahiti 
al-masa’il al-handasiyya wa al-'adadiyya 
jamt'an, xxix; M. fi al-Tahlil wa al-tarkib, 
xxv, xxvii, xxix; Ta'Uq . . . Ishaq ibn Yunus' 
... an Ibn al-Haytham fi K. Dayufantus etc. , 
xxxi; Talkhis K. al-Athar al-'ulwiyya li- 
Aristutalis, xxxiv n.32, xlvi n. 58; Talkhis 
al-Masa’il al-tabi'iyya li-Aristiitalis, l n.71; 
Talkhis K.al-Nafs li-Aristutalls, xxxiv n.32; 
Talkhis Kitabay Uqlidis wa Batlamyiis fi ' ilm 
al-manazir, xxxii; Tamdm Kitab al - 
Makhrutdt, xxv & n; al-Tanblh ' ala mawddi ' 
al-ghalat fi kayfiyyat al-rasd, xxvii; Taqwim 
al-sind'a al-tibbiyya, xxxiv n.32 ; TarbV al- 
dd’ira, xxvii n. 19; Tathbit ahkam al-nujum, 
xxiv 

Ibn Hud, his al-Istikmdl, Optics, Ixiv n. 94 

Ibn al-Tbri, his Ta’rikh, xxi n. 6 

Ibn al-Jazzar, Ixvi 

Ibn Khaldun: his al-Tbar, 14; Muqaddimah, 
Ixviii n. 108 


238 


General Index 


General Index 


239 


Ibn Khallad, 107 , 109 
Ibn al-Khammar, xlvi n. 37 
Ibn Ma'dan, Abu al-Qasim, xxvi n. 13 
Ibn Mansur, his Lisdn, 38 
Ibn Ma'ruf, see TaqI al-Din 
Ibn Maymun, see Maimonides 
Ibn Mu'adh, his De crepusculis/On Dawn and 
Twilight, Ixxiii n. 19, Ixxv & n - Ixxvi & n 
Ibn Muqla, 100 

Ibn al-Nadlm, his Fihrist, xliv n.34, xlvi 
n. 37, lix &n, lx n. 88, Ixviii n. 108; 36 
Ibn al-Qifd, his Ta ’ rikh , xii, xix & n, xx & n, 
xxi & n, xxiv, xxv n. 13, xxvi nn. 16 & 17, 
xxxi & n, Ixviii 

Ibn Ridwan, f Ali, xxvi n. 17, lx n. 88 
Ibn Rushd, Muhammad ibn Ahmad, the 
grandfather’, his Muqaddamdt, 14 
Ibn Rushd, ‘the grandson’, see Averroes 
Ibn Sahl, see Abu Sa'd al-' Ala’ ibn Sahl 
Ibn Sina, see Avicenna 
Ibn Sinan, see Ibrahim ibn Sinan 
Ibn al-Tayyib, xxiv n. 13 
Ibn Zuhr, his al-Taystr, Ixvi 
Ibn Zur'a, Ixviii n. 108 
Ibrahim ibn Bakus, 36 
Ibrahim ibn Sinan; xlviii; Harakat al-shams/ 
Motions of the Sun, 16 
idrak/comprehensio, see perception 
ihsas/sensus, 67-68, 133 
Ikhwan al-Safa’, see Sincere Brethren 
illusions, visual, see errors of sight 
e ilm, as equivalent to sina'a , 1 , 1(3] & n; Ivi, 
Ivii 

'ilm al-azlal, xlviii 

images (sing, khayal): as ‘forms seen inside 
smooth bodies’, I, 1(7]; heteronymous, 
homonymous, 120. sensory image(s), 
1 03. See also after-images; form 
imagination (al-takhayyu[), II, 3 [3 1 , 95, 150, 
155, 161, 170], 4(1, 12, 13, 14, 16, 17, 22]. 
See also memory 

immoderate range, see range of moder- 
ateness, transcendence of 
impetus, 140-141 
imtihan, see mihna 

induction (istiqra*), as method of investiga- 
tion, I, i[6] & n; II, 2(30]; as method of 
establishing uniformity, I, 2(20-22]; as 
method of establishing general pro- 
positions, I, 3(110], 6(95-97]; discussed, 
11-13. See also inspection; istiqra’ 
inference ( qiyds ): distinguished from pure 
sensation, 11. 3h 3-16, 25]; as unconscious 


operation, II, 3(36-40, 42]; liv. See also 
comparison; perception; qiyas 
in ikas: xxxvi; III, 7(85] & n; in al-Farabl, Ivii ; 

in al-Shlrazi, Ixx n. 110. See also reflection 
inspection (istiqra'), as method of investiga- 
tion, I, 1 [6] ; I, 3(21-22, 88], 6{ioo]; mean- 
ing scrutiny, II, 3(22, 23, 30, 35], 4(5, 18, 
20]; meaning survey, II, 3(222]. See also 
induction; istiqra’ 

‘Intermediate Books Val-Mutawassitat, 

xxi & n 

irises (al-taqdzih): in feathers, due to reflec- 
tion, I, 3(132] & n; manifest in subdued 
light, II, 3(218]; distinguished from colours 
of opaque bodies, I, 3(133]. See also abu 
qalamun; peacocks* feathers 
Isa ibn Zur'a, see Ibn Zur'a 
isfar/musfir, as attribute of colour, 38, 40, 
43, 45 , 57, 131, 

Ishaq ibn Hunayn, xlvi n. 37; 13, 63, 64, 71 
Ishaq ibn Yunus, xx n. 3, xxxi 
istiqra’/survey, 19, 103 

istiqra’ ta’ammul, 104, 140. See also induc- 
tion; inspection 
istizhar/victoria, 37 
itibar/experimentatio, see experiment 
i’tilaf, see ta’llf 

i'timad, Mu'tazilite concept of, 110, 141 
'izam, 93. See also hajm; size 


Jabir ibn Aflah, xx 
Jabir ibn Hayyan, 101 
Ja'far ibn Tha'lab, al-Tali * al-sa'id, xxii n. 8 
al-jahiz: on beauty, 99, 101; his Risalat al - 
Qiydn, 99 

jam, I, 3(105] & n; III, 7(178] & n 
al-Jazari, his al-Jdmi , 38 
jiha, 89, 91, 92, 108, 113. See also direction 
joining circle ( da'irat al-iltiham), I, 5(24-28, 

3 3-3 si; 47 

Jolivet, J., 64 
Jones, H. S., 71 
Jordanus de Nemore, Ixxiv 
Joseph ben Judah, see Yusuf al-Fasi 
Joseph ibn e Aqnin xx n.4. See also Yusuf 
al-Fasi 

judgement (al-tamyiz): not performed by 
sense of sight, II, 3(17]; as mode of percep- 
tion exceeding recognition, II, 3(25] & n; 
role of in visual perception, 62. faculty of 
judgement (al-quwwa al-mumayyiza): 


manner of operation of, II, 3(26-29]; liv; 
63-67, 79, 91, 103. See also discernment; 
al-tamyiz 


Kahle, P., 132 

kalam: on errors of sight, J07; on Ftimad, 
141; on knowledge, 106-107 
Kamal al-Din (al-Farisi), xi, Ixxxvi ; on the 
subject-matter of optics, Ixii-lxiii & n. 93 ; 
on structure of eye, 49-30 ; on speed of 
light, 88\ on conditions of vision, 129. 
Works: Tanqih, xii, xvi, xxviii n.21, xlv 
n.55, xlvi n.39, xlviii n.66, xlix n.70, li 
nn. 72 & 73, Ixii & nn, Ixiv— Ixxiii, Ixxii 
n. 113 (mss. of), Ixxvi, Ixxxiv, lx xxv n. 137; 
41, 46, 49, 30, 82, 87, 88, 101, 113 124, 126, 
129, 141 

Kamal al-Din ibn Y unus, xxi 
kayfiyya, see ma’iyya 
Kennedy, E. S., xlviii n. 68 
Kepler, Johannes: xi; on images, 62, 70 ; his 
Ad Vitellionem paralipomena, 70 
Khalidi, T., Ixxii n. 113 
al-Khalil ibn Ahmad, 70 
khayal, 68. See also images 
al-Khayyami, Ixv & n 

al-Khazini, ' Abd al-Rahman, his al-ZIj al - 
mutabar, 16 

al-Khwarizmi, his Majdtih, 99 
al-Kindi, 17; on tamyiz, 64. Works: al-Ajrdm 
al-gha'isa ji al-ma , lix; De aspectibus, Iviii, 
Ixv n.97; 3—6, 8, 24, 23, 26, 27, 88, 103; 
al-Mandzir al-falakiyya, lix; Ma'rifat quwd 
al-adwiya al-murakkaba, 7; Matdrih al-shu a , 
xliv & n; Rasa il, 64 
King, D. A., Ixxii n. 113 
Kirk, G. S., 36 

knowledge, prior (taqaddum al- ilm/t. al- 
ma' rifa), role of in visual perception, II, 
3(71, 72, 90, 121, 124, 126, 132, 173, 176], 
4(11, 18, 19, 20-21, 22, 29-30, 32]; III, 
7(268]; 62 

Kohl, K., xl n. 46; 1 7 
Kraemer, J., Ixviii n. 108 
Kraus, P., 101 

Krause, M., xii, xxxvii n. 39, xlviii n. 66, Ixxi 
n. 112, Ixxii n. 113, Ixxx n. 130 

krinein, 63 
kuhli, see colour(s) 

Kurz, Otto, xiv 


Landau, J. M., 132 
Lane, E. W., 14, 38 
Langermann, T., xiv, xxxvii n. 39 
lathe (shihr), I, 3(52] & n 
Lejeune, A., xvi, xlvii n. 62, lx n. 88, Ixi 
n.90; 8, 39, 44, 66, 72, 91, 93, 94, 103, 117, 
120, 123, 123, 140 

Leonardo da Vinci, on images, 70 
Liddell, H. G., 71 

light(s) (daw', adwa'): weaken as extend from 
source, I, 3(40, 42, 79-87, m]; effect of 
stronger along perpendicular lines, I, 6(24]. 
accidental lights (al-adwd' al-'aradiyya ), I, 
3(29]; II, 3(48, 52]; 21, 22, 23, 24, 28, 29. 
daylight (daw' al-nahar), evening light (d. 
al-'ishd'), morning light (d. al-sabah), see 
radiation of lights (from accidental 
lights), diffused light, 28, 29. essential 
light ( al-daw ’ al-dhdti ): issues from self- 
luminous bodies, I, 3(69] & n; of the sun, I, 
3(95]; (?) equated with primary light, I, 
3(88); mentioned, I, 3(97, no]; II, 3(52]; 
discussed, 22, 23, 24, 29, 38, 86. fire-light, 
see radiation of lights (from self-luminous 
bodies), light of stars, moonlight, sun- 
light: see radiation of lights (from self- 
luminous bodies); mathematicians and 
physicists on moonlight, xl-xli. primary 
light, I, 3(21]; Hi; 22, 28, 38; see primary 
form, reflected lights (al-adwd' al- 
mun'akisa), manner of extension, I, 
3(99-103] — see also reflection, refracted 
lights (or forms), manner of extension, I, 
3(104-107] — see also refraction, second- 
ary lights (al-adwd* al-thawam): defined, I, 
3(88); emanate from polished surfaces, I, 
3(88—97]; distinguished from reflected 
lights, I, 3(88-98]; emanate from points of 
emergence of refracted lights, I, 3(108— 
109]; may overcome the effect of primary 
light, I, 6(109]; discussed, lii, 22, 28; see also 
secondary form, strong lights: effect of 
on the eye, I, 4(1-5], 6(67], 7(16, 17]; HI, 
5(14]; hindrance to perception of weak 
lights, 1, 4(8-10]; variable effect of on per- 
ception of certain visible features, I, 
4(11-19]; effect of on perception of colour, 
I, 6(9$, 1 01- 1 04]; effect of on perception of 
visible objects, I, 6(108-112, 115]. weak 
lights, variable effect of on perception, I, 
4(11-19]. See also radiation of lights; 
speed of light 



240 


General Index 


Lindberg, D. C., xii, xliii n. 31, Ixxiii n. 118, 
Ixxiv n. 120, Ixxv tin. 125 & 126, Ixxvi 
ti. 127; 8, 24, 27 

Lippert, J., xix n. 1 , xx n. 4, Ixvi n. 103 

Lohne,J., xlvi n. 39 

Long, A. A., 106 

Lucretius, 40 

lumen, see daw’ 

Lyons, M. C., 64 


Mahdi, Muhsin, xiv ; 12, 13, 64 
ma’il 'ala, ma’il 'an, 129, 139 
Maimonides, xx, Ixvi 
ma’iyya, li; 131, 133 
al-Malik al-Kamil, xxi 
al-Ma’mun, 16 

ma na/intentio, 63, 70-73, 81, 84, 83, 129, 
130-131, 132, 137 
al-Maqqari, Ixiv n. 94 
ma rifa, 131 
al-Mas'udl, xlvi n. 37 
Ma sumi, Husayn, xxxvii n. 41 
mathema(ta), see ta'lim 
mathematicians (ashab al-ta'dlim): on the 
nature of the ray, I, 1 [4]; lii; on size- 
perception, II, 3(135, 1 61 ] ; on radial lines, I, 
6(43, 62]; 74 \ as proponents of visual-ray 
doctrine, I, 6(59] 

Matta ibn Yunus, see Abu Bishr Matta 
Maulavi Abdul Hamid, Ixxi n.114, Ixxii 
n. 113 

McVaugh, M., 7 
May, M. T., 8, 46, 30, 31 
mayl, 140-141 

medicine, art of: on the crystalline humour, 

I, 6(14]; on optic nerves, I, 6(76], See also 

eye. 

memory (dhikr, tadhakkur, hifz): in recog- 
nition, II, 3(19-20, 24-25, 49], 4(19, 20, 22, 
30, 32, 34]; III, 6(5]; as evidence of persis- 
tence of forms, II, 4(12); and imagination, 

II , 4 ( 13 - 15 ] 

Menelaus, his Spherics, xxi n. 3 
Meyerhof, M., xxxi n. 28, Iviii n. 80; 27, 46, 
31,82,103 

mihna/imtihan, 13, 16, 17. See also i'tibar; 
tajriba 

millstone (al-raha), motion of. III, 7(83, 117, 
2 66]. See also spinning top 
miqdar, 93, 137 


misann: m. al-ma , 38-39; al-m. [al-aghbar], 
38; [al-m.] al-akhdar, 38 
misanni/green: contrasted with other col- 
ours, I, 6(114] & n; as a strong colour, II, 
3(53] 8c n, as saturated colour, III, 5(7] & n. 
Misch, G., xx ii n. 10 
Mittwoch, E., Ixvi n. 103 
moderate range Card al-i tidal), see range of 
moderateness 

‘moon illusion’, xxxv-xl, Ixiii n. 93, Ixx 
n. 110; 90, 94, 109, no, 133. See also errors 
of sight 

Morrow, G. R., Ivi n. 79 
motion: perception of, II, 3(178-187]; per- 
ception of modes (sing, kayfiyya) of, II, 
3(182-183]; perceived only in time, II, 
3(184-185]; perception of equality and 
inequality of motions, II, 3(187]; persis- 
tence of explained. III, 7(261 ] & n 
al-Mubashshir ibn Fatik, xx n. 3 
Muhammad al-Fatih, Ixxx 
Muhammad ibn Musa, Abu Ja'far, xxiii 
n. 11 

muhaqqaq, meaning "distinct’, 90, 128 
Muller, A., xx n. 4, xxi n. 7 , xxii n. 10 

Munk, S., xx n. 4 

munkasif, as attribute of colour, 43, 44, 137, 
141 

munkasir, as attribute of light, 137 

al-Muqtadir, Ixviii n. 108 

Murad in, Ixxii n. 113 

Murdoch, John E., xiv 

Mursi, 'A. H., li n. 73 

Musa ibn Maymun, see Maimonides 

musfir, see isflr 

Mutakallimun, on sense-perception, 

106-107, in 

al-Mu’taman ibn Hud, see Ibn Hud 
mutanaffis, 129, 131, 132 
al-Mutawassitat, see ‘Intermediate Books’ 
Mu'tazilite(s), 107, 109, no, 136 
muwajaha, see frontality; position 


Nallino, C. A., xix n. 1; 16 
al-nammam, 103 
Narducci, E., xii, Ixxv n. 122; 97 
Nasir al-DIn al-Tusi, see al-Tusi 
Nathasus, xliv n. 34; see also Anthemius 
Nature: foresight of, I, 7(9] & n; skilfulness 
of, I, 7(13* 18] 


General Index 


241 


Nazif, M., xii, xiii, xvi, xxviii n. 21, xl n. 46, 
xlii n.30, xliii n.31, xiv n.33, xlvi n.39, 
xlvii n. 61, x Iviii n. 66, xlix n. 70, li & n, ixxx 
tin. 130 & 131, Ixxxi & n; 33, 46, 47, 31, 88, 
124 , 141 

Nebbia, G., xxii n. 10 
Nemesius of Emesa, Ixvii 
nerve, common ( al-asaba al-mushtaraka): 
described, I, 5(2, 3, 14], 6(68], 7(10]; see also 
last sentient, hollow nerve(s) (sing, al- 
e asaba al-jawfa ), uses of, I, 7(7-8, 10]. See 
also optic nerve 
Newton, Isaac, 39 
Nizamiyya College, xxx 
noema, 71 
noesis, 63-64 

notions, primary (al-ulum al-uwa[): result 
from syllogisms, II, 3(32] & n; perceived by 
recognition, II, 3(33-35] 
nous, nous kritikos, 63 
number (< al- adad ), II, 3(177] 
nuqush, see designs 
nur/lumen, see daw’ 
nusba, 91, 94, 127 


Oates, W. J., 40 
Ockham, William of, xi 
Olympiodorus, his Commentary ( Tafsir ) on 
Aristotle’s Meteorology, xlvi & n; 43, 39; In 
Aristotelis Meteora Commentaria, 39 ; 
Paraphrase (Tafsir) of Aristotle’s Meteoro- 
logy , xlvi n. 37; Scholia, xlvii n. 37 
opacity ( al-kathafa/ densitas ): and perception 
of transparency, II, 3(195]; perception of, 
II, 3 [197], xlii, lii, 61, 76. See also density 
opposition ( al-muqdbala ): as sub-division of 
position, II, 3(94, 95]; perception of, II, 
3(99-101]. See also direction 
optic nerve (al-asaba), described, I, 5(2-35] 
passim, 7(8, 10]. See also nerve, common, 
hollow 

optics: Ahmad ibn 'Isa on the subject-matter 
of, Ixiii n. 93; al-Farabi’s conception of, 
Ivi-lviii; Greek conceptions of, Ivi; I. H. ’s 
conception of — see Ibn al-Haytham, 
Works; Kamal al-DTn’s conception of, Ixii- 
Ixiii ; as a composite science, 4-7 
Oresme, Nicole, xi, Ixxv 


painting, (sinaat al-tazdwiq), technique of, 
III, 7(39, 85]. illusion in (al-suwar al- 
musawwara). III, 7(40-43, 85-86]. See also 

perspective 

Palencia, A. G., Iviii n. 80, 6 
Panofsky, E., 97, 100 

peacocks’ feathers, I, 4(24). See also abu- 
qalamun; irises 
Pecham, John, xi, Ixxiii 
peira, 13, 17. See also i'tibar 
perception (idrak): 67-68. modes of visual 
perception: II, 4(1-36]; by glancing (bi-al- 
badiha), contemplation (bi-al-ta’ammul) and 
scrutiny (al-tafaqqud), II, 4(2-5]; by glanc- 
ing, II, 4(33], by contemplation, II, 4(2, 
3-4, 6-1 1, 18-19, 20, 34]; perception of 
very distant objects, III, 7(13-23] & n; per- 
ception of very near objects. III, 7(24-25] & 
n; true perception, II, 3(174); 69-70; ascer- 
tained (muhaqqaq) perception, II, 4(5, 
29-32, 35]; judgemental perception, 66-67. 
of mixed forms: of colour, I, 6(99-100 & 
n, 101-104, 106]; of light, I, 6(105-115]. of 
visible properties, see under name of 
property. See also vision 
Peripatetics, 8 

perspective, see aerial perspective; chro- 
matic perspective; painting 
Peters, F. E., xlvi n. 37, l n. 71 
Petraitis, C., xiv n. 36 

Petrus Nonius Salaciensis, De crepusculis 
etc., Ixxvi n. 127 

physicists / natural scientists / natural 
philosophers (ashab al-tabfa), on manner 
of vision, I, 1(3], 6(6]; lii, liv-lv 
Pines, S., xxxiv n. 32; 141 
Plato, Platonic, Ixvii n. 103; 106, 107, ill 
Plutarch, Face of the Moon, xlii n. 49 
polish ( al-siqdl ), as degree of smoothness, II, 
3(193, 194], see also smoothness 
Popper, Karl, xiii, xv 
position (al-wad'): perception of, II, 
3(94-120] 8c n; sub-divisions of, II, 3(94]. 
of surfaces: frontality and inclination of, 
II, 3(102 & n, 103]; perception of, II, 3(104, 
106, 109-1 15]. of lines and intervals, per- 
ception of, II, 3(165-107, 109-115]. of 
immoderately distant intervals, percep- 
tion of, II, 3(115]. of visible objects, II, 
3(116]. of parts of visible objects, II, 
3(118-120] , 

pragma, 71 
Presocratics, 106 


242 


General Index 


General Index 


243 


Proclus, his Commentary on Euclid , Ivi & n 
properties, inferential, judgemental, 79; 

see also visible properties 
proportionality, see beauty; colour 
Pseudo- Aristotle, see Aristotle 
Ptolemy, Ptolemaic: xl, liv, Iv; 17, go, gt, 
95, i°5, 106, 120, 125 ; on modes of visual 
perception, 66-67', on virtus regitiva, 66. 
Works: Almagest, xxi & n, xxii, xxvi n. 16, 
xxxv & n, xxxviii, l, liii , lix, Ixv, Ixxi; 3, 
14—15, 16, 18; Optica/Optics, xi, xvi, xxxii, 
xxxvii & n, xxxix, xlv, xlvii n. 62, liii, Ivi, 
Iviii, lix, lx & n, Ix-lxi (compared with 
I. H.’s Optics), Ixi n.go, Ixv, Ixxi, Ixxv, 
Ixxvii, Ixxxv; 8, 13, 17, 39, 44, 45, 66, 72, 
79 , 85 , 87, 93 , 94 , 101, 117, 123, *■ 2 4 , 132, 
136, 140; Planetary Hypotheses, 3, 66; 

Tetrabiblos/al-Arba' maqdldt, lx n. 88 
punctiform analysis, principle of, 52, 69; see 
also radiation of light 
pupil of the eye/uveal aperture, I, 5 [7- 30] 
passim , 6(4], 7(2, 4] 


al-Qalqashandi, 100, 101 
qasa: to test, I, 3(3 &n, 6&n] — seei'tibar; to 
measure, 7 

qasa bi, qasa ila, go, 93, 95. See qiyas 
Qaysar ibn Abi al-Qasim, 'Alam al-Din, 

xxi, xxii & n 

qiyas, I, 3(3] & n; 14, 16, 78-80, 82, 94, 95, 
136, 140; maqayis/syllogisms, 83. See 
also comparison; inference 
Qur’an, 14 

Qusta ibn Luqa, Iviii n. 81 
Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi: Ixxi & nn, Ixxi 
n.114, Ixxiii, Ixviii-lxx & nn. 109-111; on 
colours, 82. Works: Commentary on 
Avicenna’s al-Qanun, 41—42 ; Nihayat al- 
idrak, lx n.98, Ixx n.110; al-Tuhfa al- 
Shdhiyya, Ixx n. no 

al-quwwa al-mumayyiza/faculty of 
judgement, see judgement 


radiation of colours ( ishraq al-alwan), I, 
3[ii3-i2i] 

radiation of lights ( ishraq al-adwa): modes 
of, xli\ from self-luminous bodies (al-ajsdm 
al-mudVa bi-dhdtihd), I, 3(1-21]; from acci- 
dental lights, I, 3(22-98], 6(1 11, 1 12]; 


33-37; from every point on shining objects 
in the form of a sphere, I, 3(110]; 29; 
independent of the presence or mediation of 
the eye, I, 3(138]; from all points in all 
rectilinear directions, I, 3(141-143]; /; 
23-29. See also punctiform analysis 
Rahman, F., 23, 65, 72, 84, 140 
rainbow: explanations of, xliv—xlviii & nn; 
place of in optical inquiry, Ix-lxi & n. 89. 
rainbow colours, see irises 
range of moderateness/moderate range 
Card al-i tidal): concept of. III, 3(6]; applied 
to visible properties, III, 3(6-14]; defined, 
III, 3(15]; discussed, 128; varies with 
object’s properties. III, 3(15-34]; tran- 
scendence of ( khuruj , tajdwuz) explained, 
III, 3(14, 33-34] 
rasd, 16 

Rashed, R., xxi /in n. 22, xlvi n. 59, li n. 73 
ratio, measurable, 134, 135 
Raven, J. £., 56 

ray: axial, 105; meaning visual cone, xxxviii 
& n; 105 — see also vision, cone of; pri- 
mary, secondary, 29. visual ray ( shud ' 
al-basar): as imaginary line, I, 6(59]; ancient 
concepts of, 8-10; philosophers’ concep- 
tion of. Hi; Platonic concept of, 107, in; see 
also mathematicians; axis of radial cone 
al-Razi, Abu Bakr, his al-Hdwi, Ixvi 
recognition (ma'rifa): as distinct mode of 
visual perception, II, 3(18-25]; role of 
memory in, II, 3(19-20, 24-25]; types of, II, 
3(21]; involves a kind of inference (qiyas), 
II, 3(22]; role of in perception of distance, 
II* 3[93, 161], of position, II, 3(120], of 
separation, II, 3(173], of roughness and 
smoothness, II, 3(189], in estimating mag- 
nitude or size, II, 3(150, 154], in perceiving 
what objects are, II, 4(17]; involves percep- 
tion of signs, II, 3(22, 24—25, 35]; role of in 
visual perception discussed, 67 
reflection: in Ahmad ibn 'Isa, Ixiii n.93 ; in 
al-Farabi, Ivii-lviii & n; in rainbow theory, 
xlv-xlviii. See also lights, reflected 
refraction (initdf): described, I, 6(18, 33-35, 
38]; II, 2(25]; in Aetius, Iviii n.8i;in Ahmad 
ibn 'Isa, Iviii n. 81, lix & n; in Almagest, lix; 
in Archimedes’ Catoptrics, Ivi n. 78, lix 
n. 85; in I. H.’s Commentary on Almagest , 
lix & n; (?)in al-Kindl, Iviii-lix; in Theon of 
Alexandria, lix n. 85 
rest (al-sukun), perception of, II, 3(188] 
retina, 47, 62 


review ( tasajjuh ), as a method of investiga- 
tion, I, 1 [6] & n; see also induction; 
istiqra’; survey 
Richter, J. P., 70 

Risner, Friedrich, his Latin edition of I. H. ’s 
Optics, Ixxiii— Ixxix & nn; Opticae thesaurus, 
Ixxiii n.118, Ixxv & n. See also Ibn al- 
Haytham, Works, Optics, Latin transla- 
tion of 

Rome, A., lix n. 85 

Ronchi, V., xii; 24, 70 

Rosenthal, F., Ixviii n. 108; 17, 97, 101 

Ross, W. D., 11, 85 

roughness ( al-khushuna ), II, 3(189-191] 
Rozenfeld, B. A xxv n. 14, n. 15, xxiii 
n. 11, xxx n.25, xlviii n. 66, Ixxii n. 115 
Ruska, J., 59 


Sabra, A. I., xxii nn. 8 & 10, xxvi n. 16, xxi /Hi 
n. 22, xxxiv n. 33, xxxix n. 44, xli n. 48, xliii 
n.51, li n.72, liii n.77, lix n.85, Ixiv n.94, 
Ixv nn.98 & 99, Ixxvi n. 127, Ixxxv n. 137; 
70,75,88, 90,94, 135,141 
Sacy, S. de, 58, 101 

al-Safadi, Salah al-Din, his al-Ghayth al- 
musjam, xxxi n.30, Ixviii n. 108; al-Wdfi, 
xxxi n. 30 

Sahibiyya-Shamsiyya School, Ixx n. 110 
Sa'id al-Andalusi, his Tabaqat, xxxi & n, lx 
n. 88, Ixiv & n 
Saidan, A. S., 16 

Salah al-Din al-Kahhal, Ixiii n. 93, Ixvii & 
nn; Niir al-'uyun/ Light of the Eyes, Ixvi & n 
Salah al-Din al-Safadi, see al-Safadi 
Salhani, A., xxi n. 6 
Samuel ben Judah, Ixxvi n. 127 
Sarton, G., xii, xx n. 4, Ixxiii n. 119 
saturation, see colours 
sa'wi/red: as a bright colour, I, 3 [ 1 1 4] & n; II, 
3(203]; III, 6(27]; contrasted with other col- 
ours, I, 6(114] &n 
sceptics, 106, 107, 111 
Schmidt, W., Ivi n. 78 
Schofield, M., 56 
Schoy, C., xli n. 48 

Schramm, M., xiii, xiv, xx n.3, xxviii n. 21, 
xxxiv n.33, xl n.46, xliv n.54, xlvi n.59, 
Ixvi n. 102; 51 , 88 
Scott, R., 71 

scrutiny ( tafaqqud ), see contemplation; 
inspection 


self-luminous bodies: possess forms of the 
same sort as colour, I, 2(12] &n, 3(113]; 22. 
See also radiation of lights 
sensation, pure ( mujarrad al-hiss ): dis- 
tmgushed from comparison, II, 3(1-12]; 
distinguished from inference, II, 3(13-16, 
25]; distinguished from recognition, II, 
3(19-20]; restricted to light and colour as 
such, II, 3(25, 52]. visual sensation ( ihsas 
al-basar ): extension of unlike that of painful 
and tactile sensations, I, 6[8o-8i]; in crys- 
talline, an effect of the nature of pain, I, 
6(90], 7(5]. sensations: reach the brain 
through the nerves, I, 6(75]; of touch and 
pain, II, 2(15]; transmission of, II, 2(14, 15]; 
56 

sense, the sense (al-hiss): passim; powers of 
limited, I, 8(7] & n; unable to perceive weak 
and subtle, I, 6(105]. See also common 
sense 

sensitive faculty ( al-quwwa al-hassdsa ): (?) 
meaning last sentient, II, 2(18, 26], 3(46, 
63]. See also last sentient 
sensitive power ( al-quwwa al-hassdsa ): in the 
crystalline, I, 6(65]; in visual spirit, II, 3(46] 
& n 

sensory lines, 73 

sentient, the ( al-hdss ): often meaning the last 
sentient or the sense faculty, II, 2(23], 3(48, 
52, 54, 60, 65, 95-100 passim, 105, 118, 128, 
133, 142, 144, 145, 150, I5L 152, 154. I55 » 
158, 159, 160, 161, 166, 167, 176, 185, 199, 
231, 234], 4(3, 7. 9, 10, 17); III, 2[i 6], 6[2ll, 
7(14, is, 16, 23, 222]. last sentient (ai-hdss 
al-akhir): seat of, I, 6(68, 75]; as ‘soul’s, 
sensitive faculty’, I, 6(68]; perceives 
(united) forms in common nerve, I, 
6(69-74. 79, 80-82]; II, 2(5], 3(46, 60, 63]; 
III, 2(1 1 ], 7(258] 8c n; discussed, 62-63 
sentient body (al-jism al-hdss): meaning 
visual spirit, I, 6(82]; II, 2(14, 15, 17, 18], 
3(45, 46, 47, 52, 60, 63]; (?) meaning crys- 
talline (sentient organ), II, 2(11] & n; trans- 
parency of, II, 2,(17-18]; extension of from 
crystalline’s surface to common nerve, II, 
3(46] &c n. See also spirit, visual 
sentient organ (al'udw al-hass), meaning 
crystalline, I, 6(50, 55, 90, 92], 7(11-13, 
15]. 8(7]; II, 2(1, n Sen ], 3(46 &n, 54, 63, 
65, 97, 118, 128, 143, 164]; III, 2(82], 7(14, 
15, 21]. See also crystalline 
separation (al-tafanruq) , perception of, II, 

3(172-174] 



244 


General Index 


General Index 


245 


Sezgin, F.» xvi , xxiii n.11, xxv n.13, xxvi 
n. 16, xxxiv n. 33, x l n. 46, xlvi n.37, xlix 
n. 70, /111 tt. 73, lix tt. 83, Ixvii n. 103, Ixviii 
n. 108; 60, 107 

shadow (al-zill): some properties of the 
earth’s shadow, I, 3(40, 41]; perception of, 

II, 3[I98] 

shadow play, technique of, III, 6(23 & n, 24] 
ShafT, M., xxxi n. 28 
al-Shahrazuri, his Ta’rikh, 27 
Shakespeare, William, xi v 
shape (shakl): perception of, II, 3 [ 1 27—1 34] & 
n; two kinds of, I, 3(127]; figure (hay'd) as a 
kind of, II, 3(127, 129, 132-134] 

Shawki, G., 37 
shihr, see lathe 

al-Shirazi, see Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi 
Shirwani, Mulla Fathallah, xxxvii n. 41 
Sicilian Questions, xxi 
Siegel, R. £., 140 

sight, the sight ( basar ): passim ; properties 
(khawdss) of, I, 2(1-26); effect of light on, I, 
4(1-28]; effect of colour on, I, 4(6-7]; paral- 
lels to in natural things, I, 6(43); 54. See also 
errors of sight; vision 
sign(s)/distinctive mark(s) ( amdra , arndrat), 
role of in perception/recognition, II, 3(22, 
24-25, 30, 35, 45, 52, 100, 105, i6r], 4(20, 
21, 22, 23, 25, 29, 32); III, 4(2]; discussed, 
80-81, 10 3, 130, 131 
similarity ( al-tashabuh ), II, 3(233] 

Simon, M., 31 
sina a, see *ilm 

Sincere Brethren/Ikhwan al-Safa’, on 

objects of vision, 83-86; Rasa’ il/ Epistles, 
17, 63, 86, 100, 102 

size ( al-'izam ): perception of, II, 3(13 5— 171]; 

III, 2(83]; ascertained perception of, II, 
3(164, 166-167]; mistakenly perceived at 
immoderately great distances. III, 7(13-23]; 
mistakenly perceived at immoderately 
small distances, III, 7(24-25] & n; sensory 
experiences involved in perception of, 81. 
size-distance constancy, principle of 
stated for moderate distances, II, 3(136 & 
n-140]. See also distance 

Sluse, Rene-Fran^ois de, xi 
smell, sense of, I, 7(8] 

smoke, effect on vision. III, 7(200-201, 206, 
207, 208, 209, 213]. See also aerial per- 
spective; fog 

smoothness ( aUmalasa ), perception of, II, 
3(192-194], see also polish 


Snellius, Willebrord, xi 
solidity ( al-tajassum ): perception of, II, 
3(121-126]; inferred ( istadalla ) from the 
bending of surfaces, II, 3 [125]; of distant 
objects, II, 3(126] 

‘sophists’, xxxvii n. 39; 107 
Sourdel, D., 100 

speed of light, 87-88; see also time 
spinning top (al-duwwama): multicolours of 
mixed in motion, II, 3(57] 8c n; perceived in 
motion. III, 3(12], 7(234-236, 261]. See also 

millstone 

spirit, visual ( al~ruh al-bdsira): I, 5(14], 7(7]; 
rotation of in the eye. III, 7(261-263]. See 
also sentient body; subtle body 
squint ( hawal ), effect of on vision, III, 7(258- 
260] 

Steingass, F., 38, 41 
Steinschneider, M., xx n. 4, lx n. 88 
stoic doctrine, 107 
Stratton, G. M., 36 
Stuve, G., xlvi n. 37 

subtle body, the ( al-jism al-latff), meaning 
visual spirit, I, 6(68]; II. 2(15], See also 

sentient body; spirit, visual 
Sude, B. H., xxviii n. 22; 84 
al-Sufl, Muhammad ibn Abi al-Fath, 

xxxvii tt. 39 

al-Sumaysati, see Abu al-Qasim al-S. 
sura/forma: 68-70 ; see also form 
survey ( tasaffuh ), as method of investigation, 
I, 1 [6] & n; as method of establishing uni- 
formity ( ittirad ), I, 2(5]; as method of 
investigation, II, 3(222, 225, 230]. See also 
induction; istiqra’; review 
Suter, H., xix n. 1, xxii n. 8, n. 10, xxvii n. 19, 
xxxvii n. 39 

syllogisms (sing, qiyas ), II, 3(27-29] 
synkrisis/muqayasa/i'tibar, 14-13. See also 
i'tibar 


taammala, ta’ammul, 103, 104. See also 
contemplation 

al-Tabari, xlvi n.37. See also *Ali ibn Sahl 
Rabban 
tahaqquq, 103 

tajriba/empeiria, 14, 18. See also i'tibar 
ta’lif/ta’alluf/i’tilaf, 98-99. See also 
harmony 

ta'lim, taalim/mathema, mathemata, 

3-6 


al-tamyiz, 76-79, 95. See also discernment; 
judgement 

Taqi al-Din ibn Ma ruf, his Xiir hadaqat 
al-ibsdr etc., Ixxii n. 113 
Taqi al-Din Mahmud, xxi 
ta’rib, 37, 38 
ta"riq, ta riqat, 101, 102 
tarkib (composition, synthesis) 4-7; see also 
optics 

tasaffuh, see istiqra’/survey 
tatabbu , compared with istiqra’ . 12,13 
al-Tawhidi, his al-lmta ' iva al-mu’anasa, 17 
Taymur, A., 132 
Teres, E., 39 
Terzioglu, N., xxv ti. 14 
Thabit ibn Qurra: 13 ; (?ps.-T) his al-Basar 
w a al-Basira, Ixvi 
Themistius, his De atiima, 64 
Theodosius, his Spherics, xi n. 3 
Theon of Alexandria: xxxii n. 31; his Com- 
mentary on Abttaqest, Ivi n. 78 
Theophrastus: Works: De setisibus/Peri 
aistheseon, 36; al-Hiss wa al-mahstis, 36; Peri 
aistheseds kai peri aistheton, 36; Peri opseos. 36 
time: role of in visual perception, II, 
3(57-66], 4(20, 22, 23, 24-25, 27-28]; III, 
7(217-249]; required by light to arrive at 
one place from another, II, 3(60-61]. See 
also speed of light 
Timocharis, 13 

Toomer, G. J., xxxv n. 36, xliv n. 33; 13 

top, iee spinning top 

transparency (al-shajif), perception of, 
II,3[i95~i96] 

transparent bodies, unaltered by light and 
colour, I, 6(84]; reflect as well as transmit 
light. III, 7(178] 

Trapp, J. B., xt> 

turbidity, human (kadar al-bashariyya ): 
obstacle to truth, I, 1 [6]; of minds ( ajham ), 
I, 1(1] 8 c n 

al-Tusi, Nasir al-Din, xxi. Works: R. ji 

In'ikds al-shuaat wa in itafihd/On Reflection 
and Refraction of Rays, Ixxi n.112; Rasa’il, 
xxi n.3, lx v n. 101; Recension ( Tahrtr ) of 
Euclid’s Optics, 8; al-Risala al-Shafiya etc., 
Ixv & n; al-Tadhkira, Ixv n. 101 


ugliness ( al-qubh ), perception of, II, 3(232] 
Ullmann, M., In. 71, Ixvi n. 102 

Umar al-Khayyaml, see al-Khayyami 


'Utarid ibn Muhammad, xliv & n 
uvea (al-'inabiyya )/ uveal sphere (kurat 
description of I, 5(6-7, 11, 18-26, 28-29]; 
uses of, I, 7(4]. uveal aperture, see pupil 


Van Riet, S., 23, 63, 140 

Ver Eecke, P., xxxii n. 31 ; 93 

vertigo ( al-duwar ), III, 7(261 8 c n-262] 

Vescovini, G. F., see Federici Vescovini, 
G. 

visible object = the object ( al-mubsar ), in 
text, passim 

visible properties (al-maam al-mubsara): 
enumeration of, II, 3 [44]; perception of, see 
under name of property 

vision ( ibsar ): passim ; early opinions regard- 
ing, I, 1(1]; study of, I, 1(2); liv; manner of, 

I, 6[i-ii6|; modes of, 103-104 ; objective 
account of, 102-103; nor explainable by 
reception of forms alone, I, 6[ 1— 1 1 ]; clearer 
along radial axis, II, 2(24-30); ancient doc- 
trines of, Ixvi-lxvii & n. 103; Peripatetic 
account of, 10 ; mathematicians’ approach 
to, liv-lv ; physicists’ approach to, liv-lv; 
psychology of, 62-67. angle of vision: as 
criterion (mu \ awwal , asl) for estimating size, 

II, 3(141]; see also size, cone of vision 
(makhrut al-shu'a'): described, I, 6(63]; see 
also axis of radial cone, binocular 
vision: generally explained, I, 6(69-82]; 
experimentally examined. III, 2(25-54]; 
illustrated, 111-112. direct vision, condi- 
tions (ma c anf) of stated, I, 2(1-19] and 
explained, I, 8[ 1— 1 1 ]. distinct 
(mutamayyiz) vision, I, 6(12-13, 16-17, 
22]. distinct (muhaqqaq) vision: conditions 
of, III, 2(18-21]; term signalled, 116 ; 
experimentally examined. III, 2(55-85]. 
double vision: explained. III, 2(22-23], 
7(79-80]; as result of squint. III, 7(258-260]; 
see also binocular vision, single vision: 
condition of, I, 6(77-79]; explained. III, 
2(1-16]; see also binocular vision, verid- 
ical vision, conditions of, III, 3(1-5]; 128- 
129. verification of vision, 104. See also 
perception; sight 

visual-ray doctrine: stated, I, 6(51]; 
upholders of, I, 6(51, 56-59]; futility of, I, 
6(54]; impossibility of, I, 6(59]; exposed 
and rejected, I, 6(56-60); argument of 


246 


General Index 


upholders of, II, 3(71]; adopted by kaldm, 
107. See also ray 

vitreous humour (al-zujajiyya): described, I, 
5[ 10 j & n; position and shape of surface, II, 
z[8— 1 o]; reception of forms by, II, 2[i2-i4]; 
transparency of, II, 2(14, 17-18] 

Vitello, see Witelo 
Vitruvius, 101 
Vogl, S., Iviii n. 82; 6 


wahm, see aestimatio 
Walzer, R., 64 
wazn, see beauty 

Wiedemann, E., xii, xxii n. 10, xli n. 47, xlii 
n. 30, xliii n.3i, xlv n.33, xlvi n.39, xlviii 

m . 66, xlix n. 70, li tt. 73, Ixxi n. 112, Ixxvi & 
n; 26, 27 

Winter, H. J. J., xlii n.jo, xliii n.31, Ixx 

n. 1 12 


Witelo, xi, Ixxiii; his Optica/Perspectiua, xii, 
Ixxv, Ixxui, Ixxxv n. 137; 77, 113 

Woepcke, F., xxii n. 10 


Yahya ibn Abi Mansur, his al-Zij al- 
mujarrab / al-Z. al-mumtahan / Tabulae 
Probatae/ Ma’munic ZTj, 16 
Yahya ibn 'Adi, xlvi n. 37, Ixviii n. 10S 

Yahya ibn al-Bitriq, see Ibn al-Bitriq 
Yahya ibn Masawayh, Ixvi 
Yates, Frances A., xiv 

Y usuf al-Fasi al-Isra’ili ( Y usuf ibn Y ahy a, 
Joseph ben Judah), xx & n, xxi, xxxi n. 30, 
lx n. 88, Ixviii 

Yusuf ibn Hud, see Ibn Hud 


al-Zahrawi, his al-Tasrtf, Ixvi 
al-Zawzani, xix n. 1 



